ARANYA KANDA
==================================================



SARGA 1
------------------------------



Rama, Seetha, and Lakshmana enter the great forest called Dandaka Forest and adore the eminent sages, who are 
			in penance and hermitages in that forest. This canto is named as Aranya Kanda not just to show that Rama roved 
			over just forests. The forests, as per Indian tradition, are the treasure houses of knowledge, and they are 
			the ultimate in Vedic culture.



Thus, until Ayodhya Kanda Rama's exile is in aaryavarta , the place of noblemen, 
			from River Ganges to Greece. Now Rama is stepping into an area called janasthana,meaning 
			people's place. This janasthana is the place where Rama eradicated certain negative aspects of the then anarchic 
			individualised dominions where jungle law was the only recourse and brought all of them under one roof. Though 
			people lived there about along with sages and demons as well, demonic influence is said to be predominant, as 
			per Ramayana or other Purana-s. These demons are narrated to be man-eaters, but not cannibals who eat their 
			own tribesmen.Recent discoveries revealed that the first humans were cannibals.



The Science magazine reported about the excavations at Neanderthals Neander Valley, Germany. In the words of 
			Alban Defleur of the Universite de la Mediterranee at Masrseilles, France, "The finding allows us for the first 
			time to demonstrate the existence of the practice of cannibalism by European eanderthals." It is not clear from 
			the excavations of Neanderthals, whether the cannibalism was practised for survival or as a ritual.And even 
			at Alveston in the western English country of Gloucestershire, recently found are such human thighbones, which 
			had been split down the middle to remove marrow. Archaeologists of Bristol University are saying that the evidence 
			indicated the victims could have been disabled and deformed people in society. They have been murdered and eaten, 
			and the radiocarbon dating suggests these finds are about 2000 years ago. This practice is attributed to some 
			underworld cults during the later Iron Age. That being the situation in Europe, in the knowable history, in 
			Ramayana that has happened in an unknown era, the rakshasa-s are narrated to be man-eaters, but not as cannibals.But 
			the accounts given in Aranya Kanda and elsewhere, in ancient India the rakshasa-s ate up humans neither for 
			their own survival nor for ritual but to exhibit their tyranny and their barbaric supremacy. They never reported 
			to have eaten their own clansmen, but have a palate for other breed. Hence it is not exactly cannibalism, but 
			a barbaric act to exert savage scare. This is what the sages advise Rama, Seetha and Lakshmana when departing 
			towards Dandaka Aranya, and indirectly suggest eradicating such a savage atmosphere in peaceful forests.



When it comes to isms , it is said that the whole clash is between
			Vaishnavaites and Shaivites or
			Shaaktaites , because the raakshasa-s are invariably Shiva worshippers, where Vaishnavism 
			is a later development. All the raakshasa-s or demons [in fact the term 'demon' do not suit them,] portrayed 
			hereafter, are ardent worshippers of Shiva, and have every blessing from Shiva or Brahma. It is an ethnicity 
			of its own which lived rich lives, pompous in attributes, wielded magical powers, and unabatedly performed anything 
			that is beneficial for them.Their riches and glory will be reflected in Sundara Kanda, which will be burnt down 
			by Hanuma, humbling this deleterious ethnicity, even before Rama's war with Ravana. Such an ethnic culture will 
			be portrayed hereafter, in constant conflict with Rama, and Rama eradicating each and every member of such ethnicity 
			that goes against any civility.

[Text] It is said that Rama performed diina jana rakshana in this Aranya Kaanda, Miserable 
			People's Protection and mitra jana rakshana in the next canto Kishkindha Kaanda, 
			i.e., Friendly People's Protection. The janasthana is the unexplored area by the then people of aaryavarta, 
			where the raakshasa ethnicity prevailed and which certainly resisted any outside influences or culture, and 
			which is why they are called raakshasa-s. The word raksha means protection, and 
			they protect their own culture and ethnicity, and if any outsiders to join them, they shall be subservient.For 
			e.g., Ravana does not tolerate the insult meted out by his sister Shuurpanakha at the hands of Lakshmana.Ravana, 
			though persuaded by Maareecha not to encounter Rama, does not listen to any advises but wished to abduct Seetha, 
			because he wanted to possess that beautiful woman, like all other beautiful, pompous objects like Kubera's wealth, 
			Lanka, the golden city and Pushpaka aircraft etc. Ravana even baits Seetha with queen-hood, if only she subjugates 
			to him, and all these dictatorial aspects reveal the pride and vanity of Rakshasa culture. But the term 'demon' 
			used in paucity of equivalent term may not be taken to mean just as a wicked demon or a devil, but a powerful 
			antagonistic culture or ethnic dominions of Rakshasas, in Janasthana.



Rama does much good in jansthana in wiping out those cultures of greedily dictatorial, magically overpowering, 
			and ruinous to other forms of civility. In fact this Aranya Kanda is not explained in vivid terms by the ancient 
			commentators, and if things are probed deeper in this book, Aranya Kanda, Rama did more social work than miracles.Hence 
			much can be explored into this Aranya Kaanda, the Book of Forest, in terms of sociological, demographically 
			and ethnological pursuits of Rama to establish one great orderly civil empire under one emperor, that is what 
			we call Rama Raajya. Further, it will be narrated that Rama killed these Rakshasas in thousands, which is objected 
			by materialists as how can an archer eliminate so many thousands of Rakshasas, with just a bow and arrows.It 
			may be remembered that Sage Viswamitra accords many kinds of missiles to Rama, after the killing of Tataka, 
			the demoness, in Bala Kanda.It may not be surprising for this generation to know that a single trigger can create 
			havoc of Hiroshima or Nagasaki, and then in all its probability Rama also might have triggered in the same way, 
			with the missiles endowed by Sage Viswamitra.

Shlok 1: On entering the impenetrable Dandaka forest that courageous and unassailable Rama saw a clusters of hermitages of sages. 
[3-1-1]

[Commentary] The word aatmavaan is the question Valmiki put to Narada at the start of the epic in Bala Kanda, as the first word 
of verse 1-1-4. The courage and invincibility are reflected in the opening verse of this canto, since Rama has to perform
diina jana or sajjana rakshaNa i.e., saving the helpless or goodly men, viz. in the present context, the 
sages. The sages are to be saved from the onslaught of demons, which requires, both courage and un-invincibility. Apart 
from the above aatmavaan normally means sagacious one.

Shlok 2: Overspread with Darbha, the sacred grass, and jute clothing, well pervaded with Vedic splendour and well glowing like the 
un-seeable solar arena in the sky, with naked eye. [3-1-2]

[Commentary] This connotes Vedic import in saying that Supreme is far beyond from Solar orbit. In iishaavaasyopanishad , at 
hymn 15, we hear the following mantra , hymn:



On looking at the rising red sun, the devotee is asking "Oh! Pooshan! God Sun, nourisher of the universe, the trueness of 
the Supreme is covered by your golden disk like vessel, [i.e., your Solar disk,] slide it aside, for as a truthful and righteous 
devotee, I visualize [that which is beyond your golden Solar disc.]

[Commentary] This is said to be the coming of Supreme into lower abode of Solar orbit from His Supreme abode, say vaikuNTHa. 
Now Rama and Seetha are passing through this dazzling Solar-orbit like hermitage, to present themselves before the true 
devotees, and even to eradicate vice on earth. This appearance is without any prayers from the devotee, as contained in 
the above Vedic hymn. God reveals Himself

Shlok 3: Those hermitages have well-tidied thresholds on all sides, dense with many deer and teemed with many groups of birds, and 
they are the recourse for all living beings. [3-1-3]

Shlok 4: Those hermitages are always adored by groups of apsarasa-s with their continued dancing, their Holy Fireplaces are very 
broad, and are with oblation items, vessels, deerskins and sacred grass, and they are beaming forth with gigantic trees 
that yield sacred and palatable fruits, and with ritual fuels, and water vessels, tubers and fruits. [3-1-4, 5]

[Commentary] The Vedic ritual demands three Fireplaces called tretaagni , three fires. They are dakshiNa agni Southern 
Fire; gaarhapatya agni Household Fire; aahavaniiya agni Invocation Fire. These three are lit day in and 
day out, symbolising that the fire in living beings has continuity. Wherever a Vedic ritual takes place the celestials will 
come to take their share of oblations and the celestial dancers dance thereabout in praise of the ritual. The oblation vessels 
are of particular nature and a long spoon is made of particular wood, to oblate clarified butter or milk etc., into the 
Alter of Fire. The deerskin is the prescribed seat for meditation. The sacrificial grass is the essential item of even in 
domestic rituals, symbolising that the human kind shall prosper like the interlaced and intermingled grass, where the starting 
or the end point is intractable.

Shlok 6: Those hermitages are sacrosanct for Ritual fire is being worshiped with fire-oblations and sacrifices to the reverberating 
Vedic sounds, and they are enwrapped with lotus ponds with lotuses, and even with flowers of forest. [3-1-6]

Shlok 7: They have age-old saints with controlled senses who are clad in jute cloths and deerskin, and who subsist on fruits and 
tubers alone, ye their resplendence is like that that of the Sun-god or the Fire-god. [3-1-7]

[Commentary] This chiira is the Sanskrit word for the present day sari and it is still called as chiira in 
some parts of India.

Shlok 8: Rama has seen such a cluster of hermitages that is glistening forth just by the presence of holy saints whose sustenance 
is constrained, and that hermitage is distinctive like Brahma's abode, reverberating with the sounds of that Brahma's Vedic 
chants alone. [3-1-8]

Shlok 9-10a: That glorious and great resplendent Rama on seeing those precincts of hermitage that is graced with highly blest Brahmans, 
the knowers of Brahma, neared it, unstringing the bowstring of his great bow. [3-1-9-10a]

Shlok 10b-11a: Those great sages, the possessors of divine knowledge, are gladdened on seeing Rama and illustrious Seetha, and they moved 
towards them welcomingly. [3-1-10-11a]

[Commentary] Indian archers fasten the bowstring only when that bow is to be put to use. Further there is a method described in dhanurveda 
as to how a bowstring is to be fastened to the other end of the bow. The Indian mythological bows are of six feet or two 
yards, in height. It is also a measure like horse length. The string, which so far is spiralled to the bow beam, is to be 
removed. Then the bottom end of the bow is to be kept pressed onto the ground with left foot's big toe. Then with the right 
hand the edge of the string is handled and with left hand the other end of the bow is to be held and crouched, so that the 
string can be hooked or fastened there. After fastening, the stretch of the string is to be tested [like the occasional 
testing of the badminton or tennis racquet for the tension of its gut,] by pulling and leaving it, so that it makes a warring 
sound. By this sound of the bowstring, which is a signal to the opponent, the opponent comes to know as to who is handling 
which bow. Then if the archer is going to beam out an arrow, he shall pull the arrow on the bowstring up to his right ear 
and leave it, aakarNaanta prayoga . Here, removing the bowstring from its fastening implies that this archer, namely 
Rama who is so far handling the stringed bow, for he is roaming in forests, and since he is entering the place of elderly 
saints now, unfastened the bowstring in all his humbleness to sages and saints.

Shlok 11a-12: But those sages who are austerely committed to vows, on their seeing Rama, the treader on the path of rectitude, and who 
is now arising like moon, and at Lakshmana and at glorious Seetha as well, rendered Vedic blessings and welcomed the trio. 
[3-1-11a-12]

[Commentary] This context is also explained in the following ways:

Shlok 13: Those forest-dwelling sages saw the physical built, its augustness and gracefulness, and his fine attire remaining in astonished 
postures. [3-1-13]

[Commentary] Here ruupa is the bodily shape that which, though undecorated, looks richly decorated. samhanana is beauty 
of the well arranged body parts with no dissimilarities, where the good old saying 'equality is the basis of beauty, and 
inequality is the basis of society...' may be remembered. lakshmiiH is laavaNya i.e., self-luminous augustness. 
While saukumaarya is the delicacy, like that of a blooming flower. suveSa is a neat and tidy outfit or 
suitable outfit. Rama, Seetha and Lakshmana wear a particular dress, given by Queen Kaikeyi in Ayodhya. Those dresses are 
peculiar to themselves and not on par with the regular dress of hermits. This dress of these three itself is a confusing 
attire for onlookers, like demon Viradha, or monkey-chief Sugreeva, for these three do look like neither perfect sages nor 
perfect warriors. Even the demon Viradha scorns them in the next chapter, for the inconstancy in their attire and their 
wielding weapons.

Shlok 14: The forest-dwellers saw Seetha, Lakshmana and Rama, without a wink on their own eyes, as that trio is causing surprise with 
their arrival.



The forest-dwellers saw Rama, Seetha, and Lakshmana without a wink on their own eyes [like celestial beings, who do not 
have the winking property on their eyes like living beings,] as their arrival is causing surprise.



The forest-dwellers saw Rama, Seetha, and Lakshmana without a wink on their own eyes [as though the Vishnu along with Goddess 
Lakshmi and Thousand headed-serpent, aadi sheSha are coming from their abode
vaikunTha to this hermitage, for this hermitage is like Brahma's abode, as already said, thus 
the sages lost their wink. And loosing any single wink will loose the sight of these divinities from
vaikunTha; hence their unannounced arrival caused surprise in them, which further caused a 
wink-less state [3-1-14]

Shlok 15: Those august sages that are interested in the well being of all beings have indeed accommodated Rama in that hermitage, 
as Rama is their guest a priori. [3-1-15]

Shlok 16: Then those august sages who are similar to sacred fire in glow have procedurally accorded guestship to Rama, and fetched 
water for him. [3-1-17]

Shlok 17-18a: On sounding out Vedic blessings those virtuous sages have offered flowers, fruits and tubers, and even the entire hermitage 
to that great soul Rama, and then with their palms adjoined. [3-1-17-18a]

Shlok 18b-19a: "The king will have great renown for he is the ruler of the righteousness of these people, a protector, a respectable and 
adorable one, and as he wields the sceptre of justice, he is a revered one too... [3-1-18-19a]

Shlok 19b-20a: "The fourth part of Indra is the protector of people, called the king, and hence Oh! Raghava, the king is hailed, and hence 
he enjoys best and delightful fortune... [3-1-19b-20a]

[Commentary] Here, Rama may be astonished as to why these forest dwelling sages eulogise him so much. The sages are not using unnecessary 
conversation and they are informing Rama what a king shall be, whether he is in the capital or in forests. The term Indra 
is an allusion to the 'Ruler'. It refers to seven more rulers or ruler like associates of Indra, ashta dikpaalaka-s. 
It is said that:

[Commentary] A king is made with eight aspects of eight rulers of eight corners of the universe. Viz., indra, vaayu [Air,]
yama Death-god suurya Sun, agni Fire, varuNa Rain chandra Moon, and kubera 
Wealth. When the earth is heading towards anarchy, Brahma is said to have created the king with one fourth of resplendence 
of each of the eight rulers. Manu Srmriti states as below:

[Commentary] Manu smriti also prescribes certain rules for the king called Vrata. Indra accords rains for four months to sprout the seeds, 
so the king shall sprout the people's hopes. Sun evaporates earthly water slowly and insignificantly so as to give the next 
rain, so the king shall collect taxes and spend them again for the welfare of people suurya vrata . Air pervades 
everywhere to enliven people, so the king shall pervade everywhere through his agents to watch out good and evil for his 
subjects maaruta vrata . Yama, the God of Time, has no friends or foes and ends the lives of any one at the end 
of their time, and so shall the king in according punishments yama vrata . Rain binds one and all and it is the 
livelihood of any living being, so is king to bind his subjects for a good livelihood varuNa vrata . Moon is both 
a pleasant one and presiding deity for medicinal herbs, so shall the king be pleasant to his people and keep their health
chandra vrata . Fire is fiery and burns down evil and the king shall be fiery to his enemies, either internal or 
external aagneya vrata . The earthly earth sustains scholars and stupid, wealthy and poor, prosperous and pathetic 
alike, so shall the king bear with all of his subjects pR^ithvii vrata

Shlok 20b: "You alone have to protect us as we are the subjects living in your kingdom..May you be in the capital... or in the forest...you 
are our king... [3-1-20b,c]

Shlok 21: "We gave-up punishments, either physically or by the power of curses, conquered are our anger and senses, and our ascesis 
is the only wealth of ours, thus oh! King, we are to be protected by you, like the foetus inside a womb... [3-1-21]

Shlok 22: Thus saying they worshipped Raghava along with Lakshmana, on giving fruits, tubers, flowers and other varieties of forest 
foods. [3-1-22]

Shlok 23: Thus other saints and sages who are the followers of the virtue, and similar to the Sacred Fire adored Rama, the king, according 
to the wont of custom. [3-1-23]



SARGA 2
------------------------------

[Text] Viradha the demon confronts Rama and other and tries to abduct Seetha, and
          then Rama. The killing of this Viradha is the first act of Rama in eliminating negative
          forces in his empire to establish Rama Raajya. This killing is also a gift to Sage
          Sharabhanga, whom he meets later, as per the meaning of verse I-1-41 of Samkshepa
          Ramayana contained in Bala Kanda. Rama thus started to act freeing the saints and sages
          in forests, and the forests themselves, from the cruelties of demons. Viradha is a demon
          by curse and a devotee Goddess Lakshmi, now incarnate as Seetha. Hence this demon wanted
          to own his goddess and hence lifts Seetha into his hands to abduct her away from Rama.
          But Rama and Lakshmana overpower and eliminate him, rescuing not only Seetha, but also
          other saints and sages living thereabout.

Shlok 1: Then, on receiving the hospitality in that hermitage for that day, and on the next
  day before sunrise, Rama bade farewell to all of the sages, and thus entered the deep forests.
  [3-2-1]

Shlok 2-3: Rama followed by Lakshmana has indeed seen that midst of the forest which is
  filled with very many animal herds, where the bears and tigers are frequenting, and whose trees,
  creepers, bushes are ruined, water ponds rendered unsightly, birds song-less, but where the
  swarms of crickets are whistling deafeningly. [3-3-2, 3]

Shlok 4: Therein Rama has seen along with Seetha, a lurid voiced man-eater who is akin to a
  mountain-peak, among horrendous animals. [3-2-4]

Shlok 5: Deep eyed, huge mouthed, horrible with a monstrous belly, hideously misshapen, and
  a very soaring one that demon is, an ugly one with a horrendous look. [3-2-5]

Shlok 6: Wearing tiger's skin that is wetted with fat and dampened with blood, he is
  frightening to all beings like the wide-open mouth of Death. [3-2-6]

Shlok 7-8a: He skewered three lions, four tigers, two wolves, ten spotted deer, and a big head
  of an elephant with tusks and fouled with fat on an iron spear, and he is yelling with his
  deafening voice. [3-2-7-8a]

Shlok 8b-9a: He that demon on seeing Rama, Lakshmana and Seetha ran towards them very angrily,
  like the Time, the Eliminator of people. [3-2-8b-9a]

Shlok 9b-10a: He shouted a tremulous blare, as though to tremor the earth, and seized Vaidehi
  with his arms and gone afar, and then said this way. [9b-10a]

Shlok 10: "You two wear jute cloths like hermits, but handle arrows, bows and swords like
  warriors, yet entered Dandaka forest with your wife... your lives are on the wane...
  [3-2-10b-11a]

Shlok 11b-12a: "How saintly are you while living with your wife? You sinful fellows dishonest are
  you ways... who are you... you insulters of sainthood? [3-2-11b-12a]

[Commentary] This demon Viradha could not comprehend their identity prima facie. By their
  physique and carrying the bows and arrows, knives etc., they look like warriors. By their dress,
  hairdo, pendants etc., they look like sages. He has so far not seen a warring sage, like Bhargava
  Rama or Parashu Rama. These two men dressed like sages but look like warriors and are moving in
  the deadly forests with a wife. vi raadha , means without, love, a loveless one, and in
  another context it means that vi = verily, raadha adoring Krishna like Raadha.
  He is said to adore Goddess Lakshmi before he is cursed to become a demon, and finding that
  goddess in Seetha, he lifts her into his arms, like a baby. This demon while admonishing Rama and
  Lakshmana for flaunting the sainthood, for they are moving with weapons and a wife, he narrates
  about himself in next verses.

Shlok 12b-13a: "I am a demon named Viradha and I will be on the rove in this impassable forest
  with weapon, always eating the flesh of sages... [3-2-12b-13a]

Shlok 13b-14a: "This best waisted woman will be my wife, and I will drink your blood of you two
  sinful one in a fight with you... [3-2-13b-14a]

Shlok 14b-15a: On listening those arrogant words spoken in bad intent by that evil minded
  Viradha, Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, is much panicked. [3-2-14b-15a.]

[Commentary] Here Viradha said that Seetha would become his 
 bhaaryaa
  which would
  translate into a 'wife' in routine manner. It is said that Viradha is a devotee of Goddess
  Lakshmi and it is not congruous for a devotee to say like that. Here, aascharya
  ramayana, another version of Ramayana, defines bhaarya as: bhaa luminous
  one; aryaaH adorable. Hence his word should mean, "this luminary is my adorable one."
  Further he handles Seetha like a baby, as in 3-2-16, she is said to be viraadha anka
  gata , gone into the arm-fold of Viradha as babies would. The peevish ones like Viradha or
  Ravana grab her very quickly for she is Goddess Lakshmi, the presiding deity of wealth.

Shlok 15b-16: Seetha in fear wiggled like a plantain tree in a whirlwind, and on seeing at the
  auspicious lady gone into the arms of Viradha, Raghava spoke this sentence to Lakshmana, with his
  face fully turning to pale. [3-2-15b-16]

Shlok 17-18a: "See! Gentle Lakshmana, see that illustrious princes Seetha, the daughter of
  emperor Janaka, one who is brought up comfortably in immense comfort, and my auspiciously
  traditional wife... now gone into the wretched hands of a demon... [3-2-17-18a]

Shlok 18b-19a: "That which is desired to befall on us, and that which is the choicest desire of
  Kaikeyi, and that which is concomitant to her boons, oh, Lakshmana, that has come to pass
  quickly, and today only Lakshmana... [3-2-18b-19a]

Shlok 19b-20: "She who is a foresighted lady, she who is not happy with the kingdom for her son,
  she by whom I, a dear one to all beings, am sent to forests, and she is my middle mother, her
  desire is fulfilled today, nay now itself... [3-2-19b-20]

Shlok 21: "To me, oh, Soumitri, the grief of others touching Seetha is more, than father's
  demise or grabbing away my kingdom... [3-2-21]

[Commentary] Here Rama says that 'my' kingdom is grabbed away, and now the grabbing away of
  Seetha is more painful, even somebody touching Seetha, the most. Rama did not loose heart to
  regain his kingdom. He underwent the course of what his father ordered and is definite of return
  to Ayodhya to rule back his empire. In the next canto Kishkindha, Vali the monkey hero questions
  Rama, as who he is to enter Kishkindha. To that Rama replies, "All the Bharata continent belongs
  to us, the Ikshwaku-s, and presently the emperor is Bharata, and hence on behalf of my emperor
  Bharata I slay you." There he is again confident of returning to capital after completing his
  exile. Hence claiming this kingdom as 'my' kingdom does not alter his status of emperor, though
  not now, but after the completion of exile he is to become one. Again Rama weighed the agony in
  terms of his father's death and grabbing away of his kingdom. Raajya Lakshmi, Kingdom Wealth is
  nothing before his wife, Wealth of Fortune, i.e. Bhaagya Lakshmi. Hence Rama is more bothered
  about his fortune wife than the retrievable kingdom, or the death of an aged father.

Shlok 22: When said thus by Rama, Lakshmana said this with flooding tears of lament, and in
  his anger hissing like a forestalled snake. [3-2-22]

[Commentary] Such portrayal of Lakshmana as a fundamentally angry person, like a hissing
  snake, and a sharp tongued one etc., are attributed in mythology to the serpentine character of
  aadi SheSa, the thousand headed serpent on which Vishnu reclines. The mythological
  derivation is that Lakshmana is the incarnation of that serpent, while Bharata and Shatrughna are
  the incarnations of the conch shell and disc that adorn the two upper hands of Vishnu.

Shlok 23: "Oh, Rama, you being the Indra like lord of all beings, and while you are being
  attended by an adherent like me, what for you worry yourself like a derelict? [3-2-23]

Shlok 24: "He will now be felled with my arrow as I am enraged at him, and gone are his
  lives now, and indeed the earth shall drink his blood... [3-2-24]

Shlok 25: "Indeed, that which anger was there to me on Bharata when he desired kingdom, that
  anger I will now release on Viradha, as Indra released his Thunderbolt on the mountain...
  [3-2-25]

Shlok 26: "Accelerated by my shoulder strength this ruinous arrow shall fall on his massive
  chest, thus life from his body shall decamp, and then he shall whirlingly fall onto the earth..."
  So said Lakshmana. [3-2-26]



The forest
  Dandaka Forest wherein Rama is trekking is a dominion of their kingdom, but a deserted forest.
  One named Danda, the last son of Ikshvaku, was performing all demonic activities in their
  kingdom. His father Ikshvaku received many a complaint about Danda's deeds from his subjects, and
  angered at his erring son Danda and banishes him from the kingdom.



Danda took refuge
  in Vindhya mountain range and built a kingdom and a beautiful capital for himself called
  Madhumanta. He rubbed shoulders with all the demons thereabout and thus became a disciple of Sage
  Shukraachaarya, the guru of demons. One day when Sage Shukraachaarya is not in hermitage, Danda
  reaches there, and sees Araja, the elder daughter of the sage Shukra, and molests her, in spite
  of her repeated protests. Later when Sage Shukraachaarya comes to know about it, gets enraged and
  curses Danda, to fall down along with his entire kingdom under a mud storm around that Madhumanta
  capital for a period of seven consecutive days.



Then there is a
  mud storm for seven days and entire kingdom went under mud, later to become a forest called
  Dandaka. The place to where the curse fearing people fled from that Madhunata to further south is
  called Jansthaana. At later time, when Rama's peregrination started, these two places, Dandaka
  forest and Janasthaana, are under the domain of Ravana, and Ravana made one demon named Khara, as
  the protector of this dominion Jansthaana.



This is the place
  where Rama built his hermitage Panchavati, at which Demoness Surpanakha arrives, and from where
  Ravana abducts Seetha. When Rama asks the forest dwelling sages for a quiet place to live on, the
  sages in Dandaka forest, will make Rama constantly move southward, till he reaches Janasthana,
  indirectly directing Rama to eradicate the demonic influence over these places, which once
  belonged to Rama's kingdom.



SARGA 3
------------------------------

[Text] Rama and Lakshmana enter into a dialogue with Viradha, the demon and shower arrows on him. Later, Viradha, the demon carries 
Rama and Lakshmana away from Seetha.

Shlok 1: Then in his turn that demon Viradha said this sentence filling the forest with his gruesome voice, "I am asking you, really... 
tell me who you are and whereto you wish to go? " [3-3-1]

Shlok 2: Then that highly resplendent Rama said about his Ikshvaku dynasty to the blazing faced demon who is insistent. [3-3-2]

Shlok 3: "Know us as Kshatriya-s with ennobled bearing, and we are trekking the forest...but we wish to know about you, who are you 
that move about in Dandaka forest? [3-3-3]

Shlok 4: Viradha said to that truly valiant Rama, "Ah! I'll tell you, oh king, be informed of me, oh Raghava... [3-3-4]

Shlok 5: "I am the son of Java indeed... my mother is Shatahradaa, and all the demons on earth call me Viradha...'[3-3-5]

Shlok 6: "On my undertaking ascesis I derived a boon from the beneficence of Brahma, by which I will neither be cut, nor slit, nor 
killed with a weapon in this world..."[3-3-6]

Shlok 7: "Leave off this lady without any yearning for her, and you expeditiously flee-away as you have come, then your lives will 
not be snatched away... [3-3-7]

Shlok 8: Rama in reply said this to that ogre Viradha, whose eyes are fully bloodshot in anger, who is monstrous in his body, and 
evil in intent... [3-3-8]

Shlok 9: "You knave, fie upon you... you are in quest of you own death for your meanly measures, and definitely you will get it in 
this confrontation. Stay! I will not let you to live... [3-3-9]

Shlok 10: Then, stringing his bow Rama indeed darted very sharp arrows, very quickly and well aiming the demon... [3-3-10]

Shlok 11: Indeed seven arrows are let off with perfectly stringed bow, which have golden vanes, and very fast ones that equal the 
flights of Garuda, the Divine Eagle and the Air-god. [3-3-11]

Shlok 12: But, they the arrows that are akin to infernos and dressed with peacock feathers as their fins, on piercing the body of 
Viradha they fell onto the ground besmirched with blood. [3-3-12]

Shlok 13: When that demon is thus struck, then he placed Vaidehi down from his arms, hauled up his spear, and very angrily rushed 
towards Rama and Lakshmana. [3-3-13]

Shlok 14: And holding fast his spear that is similar to the Indra's Flagstaff he blaringly yelled a ghastly shriek, and thus he shone 
forth like the wide-mouthed Death, ready-to-gulp. [3-3-14]

Shlok 15: Then with an effulgent arrow-rain those two brothers incessantly rained on demon Viradha, who is similar to the terminator 
of lifetime. [3-3-15]

Shlok 16: He that highly horrendous demon laughed at that arrow-shower, and standing for a while he yawned, and on his yawning and 
stretching his limbs in fatigue those arrows that earlier have gone speedily, spilled out from his body that speedily. [3-3-16]

Shlok 17: Demon Viradha held back his lives by the touch of boon, and raising up the spear he ran quickly at Rama and Lakshmana. [3-3-17]

Shlok 18: The best wielder of weaponry Rama ripped that spear apart, which is akin to the Thunderbolt of Indra, and that which is 
like a blaze in the sky, with two arrows in the sky itself. [3-3-18]

Shlok 19: Shattered by Rama's blazing shafts that spear fallen on ground like the boulder mass of Mt. Meru when it is shattered by 
Indra's Thunderbolt. [3-3-19]

Shlok 20: They quickly upraised their swords and like a pair of up-swinging black-cobras they rapidly crashed on him, and then battered 
him mightily. [3-3-20]

Shlok 21: He that demon thus beaten very firmly by Rama and Lakshmana, then on grabbing those unwavering ones and manly tigers with 
his arms, that furious demon wished to carry them away. [3-3-21]

Shlok 22: Knowing the thinking of the demon for sure, Rama spoke to Lakshmana, "Let him easily carry us anywhere on his way... [3-3-22]

Shlok 23: "Let this demon carry us as he wishes, and Saumitri, by which way this night-walker goes, that alone will be our way... 
[3-3-23]

[Commentary] Rama does not want to travel comfortably on the shoulders of the demon, but wants to examine what the demon wanted to do 
next, after carrying afar. The prince in Rama will not let the demon go rampant. Besides, the divine fury allows any sinister 
to tread his own way towards his own grave.

Shlok 24: But he that night-walker arrogant as he is by his might has uplifted Rama and Lakshmana like babies by that might and courage 
alone, and placed them on his shoulders as one would place babies. [3-3-24]

Shlok 25: That nightwalker Viradha on placing those two Raghava-s on his shoulders gone towards deeper forest yelling very luridly. 
[3-3-25]

Shlok 26: That demon entered into a baffling forest that is like a very dark cloud in its sheen, where a variety of massive trees 
are contained in, numerous flocks of vulturine birds are overspreading, and where wild jackals and other predaceous animals 
are sprawling around, along with Rama and Lakshmana. [3-3-26]







Ikshvaku dynasty is of long lineage. This is Surya Vamsha, Solar dynasty of Kshatriya-s, of which Mahaa Kavi Kalidasa wondered 
as to how it can be narrated, for it is of a long lineage and he admires kvaH suurya prabhavo vamshH... in his 
Raghu Vamsha Mahaa Kaavya, at 1-2. This dynasty may be known to understand why from Viradha to Ravana, wanted to die at 
the hands of Rama. The list of those kings is compiled in aananda raamayana and the same is being given hereunder...



Suurya - IkShvaaku - Kaakuthsa va~NshanukramaNika Srii mahaa ViShNu originated Brahma .From Brahma 
the lineage, one after the other, is Mariici - Kashyapa - Suurya - Sraaddha Deva (Vaivasvata) - IkShvaaku - VikukShi (Sashaada) 
- Kakuthsa - Indravaahu - Anenasa - Vishvarandhi- Chandra - Yuvanaashva - Saabastha - BR^ihadashva - Kuvalayaashva - DhR^iDhaashva 
- Haryashva - Nikumbha - BarhaNaashva - KR^itaashva - Syenajit - Yuvanaashva - Maandhaata - Purukuthsa - Trasaddsya 2 - 
AnaraNya Haryashva - AruNa - Tribandhana - Satyavrat (OR) Trishanku - Harishcandra (OR) Satya Harishcandra - Rohita - Harita 
- Champa - Sudeva - Vijaya - Bharuka - VR^ika - Baahuka - Sagara - Sama~njasa - A~Nshumanta - Diliipa - Bhagiiratha - Shruta 
- Naabha - Sindhudviipa - Ayutaayu - RutuparNa - Sudaasu (OR) Mitrasaha (OR) KalmaShaanghri - by him Ashmaka - Muulaka Ariikavaca 
- Dasharatha - EiDavida - Vishvasaha - KhaTvaanga - Dhiirghabaahu - This Deergha baahu is also known to be Dilipa, and from 
that - Diliipa - Raghu - Aja - Dasharatha - and Dasharatha begot Vishnu again as Raama



SARGA 4
------------------------------

[Text] Rama and Lakshmana come to know about the curse of Viradha. Viradha desires to die in then hands of Rama according to the 
amendment given by the cursing authority, and thus he will be killed and relieved of his curse by Rama, and his elimination 
of negative forces starts with the elimination of Viradha. At the time of release from his curse, Viradha advises Rama to 
go to Sage Sharabhanga, who can advise Rama properly. It is said whenever a superior being is approached, he shall not be 
neared empty-handedly. So, the elimination of Viradha, first act of Rama to safeguard the diinajana 
parirakshana in Dandaka forests is the gift that Rama takes to the Sage Sharabhanga in next chapter. This is not 
a separate chapter in Baroda edition. But in Gorakhpur and Eastern versions it is a separate one.

Shlok 1: On seeing those two very dexterous scions of Kakutstha, and the best ones from Raghu dynasty, namely Rama and Lakshmana, 
grabbed and being carried off, Seetha screamed in a high-pitched voice.[3-4-1]

Shlok 2: "He that truth-abiding, virtuous, and the flawless Rama of Dasharatha is carried off along with Lakshmana by the demon with 
a ferocious look... [3-4-2]

Shlok 3: "Wild bears, tigers and panthers aspire to eat me away... oh, best demon, thieve me instead and release Kakutstha-s... Hail 
to thee..." [Said Seetha.] [3-4-3]

Shlok 4: On hearing Vaidehi's that utterance those valorous ones Rama and Lakshmana speedily busied themselves in eliminating that 
evil-minded demon Viradha. [3-4-4]

Shlok 5: Soumitri indeed severed the left arm of that ferocious one, while Rama rent the right arm of that demon with his might. [3-4-5]

Shlok 6: When his arms are mutilated that demon similar to a dark-cloud is frustrated, fainted, and fell onto ground, like the mountain 
demolished by the Thunderbolt of Indra. [3-4-6]

Shlok 7: They battered that demon with their fists, hands and feet, and even by heaving and hurling him again and again they entirely 
pounded on him on the ground. [3-4-7]

Shlok 8: Though that demon is battered with many arrows, even sheared off with two swords, and even though he is entirely pounded 
on the ground he is not killed. [3-4-8]

Shlok 9: On observing that the mountain-similar demon is ineradicable that easily, then Rama, the sublime one, and the bestower of 
shelter in fear, spoke this sentence to Lakshmana. [3-4-9]

Shlok 10: "Oh! Manly-tiger Lakshmana, it is impossible to overpower this demon with weapons in a confrontation, hence, let's bury 
this demon... [3-4-10]

Shlok 11: "Lakshmana, a very deep pit be dug for this furious and ferocious reprobate in this forest, as though for an elephant... 
[3-4-11]

Shlok 12: On saying to Lakshmana that a trench shall be dug...' then Rama repressively placed his foot on the throat of Viradha, and 
stood by. [3-4-12]

Shlok 13: On hearing that said by Raghava, demon Viradha sincerely spoke these humble words to Rama, the finest one from Kakutstha 
dynasty. [3-4-13]

Shlok 14: "Dead I am, oh! Manly-tiger and a coequal of Indra in your strength... I have fallaciously not identified you earlier... 
oh, best one among men... [3-4-14]

Shlok 15: "Oh, sire, now I have known you to be Rama, the son of Kausalya... and even propitious Seetha and greatly renowned one Lakshmana 
are now known to me... [3-4-15]

Shlok 16: "By curse I had to enter this ghoulish demon's body, but I am a celestial gandharva, named Tumburu and Kubera cursed me... 
[3-4-16]

Shlok 17-18a: "When entreated by me, he that greatly renowned Kubera said to me, 'When Dasharatha's Rama kills you in a fight... then 
you will attain your nature of celestial body and you will go to heavens...' [3-4-17, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: " King Kubera thus cursed angrily me for not presenting myself in his service when I was interested in a celestial dancer 
Rambha, and indeed he alone said this curse-clearance to me... [3-4-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: " And by your grace I am released from this utterly hideous cruse, and now I wish to go to my own heavenly abode, oh, firestorm 
of enemies, let safety betide you all... [3-4-19b, 20a]

[Commentary] The celestial beings are called sura and their antagonists are a-sura . There are many sura beings living 
in heavens and netherworlds. To name a few, they are uraga, garuda, gandharva, kimpurusha, siddha, saadhya, vidyaadhara, 
chaaraNa, apsara, yaksha, guhyaka, bhuuta, khechara and the like. Of them gandharva-s are amiable beings for their 
expertise in performing arts. The apsara beings are the divine courtesans and among them are four apsara beings of high 
order. They are Rambha, Urvashi, Menaka and Tilottama . These four are instrumental to Indra, to incite and allure 
sages from their austere penance, lest they may win over the ship on heavens from Indra. The present gandharva, namely Tumburu, 
in his courting with Rambha had belated his services to Kubera, the Chief Divinity for Wealth Management. Hence Kubera cursed 
this gandharva to become the demon called Viradha, but yet this Tumburu alias Viradha is the devotee of Goddess Lakshmi. 
The antagonists of sura are a-sura beings and all sorts of demons, monsters, etc., come under this category and they are 
not devils or Satan's stooges, but they equal the capabilities of sura beings. Prof. Ranade observes that "Dr. R.G. Bhandarkar, 
in an important article in the B.Br.A.S. Journal makes the following interesting suggestion. The Sanskrit equivalent of 
the word demon viz., 'Asurya' may here refer to the 'Assyrian' country. 'Assyrian and 'Asuryan' being philologically identical, 
the 'y' and the 'u' being interchangeable as in Greek..."

Shlok 20b- 21: "Oh, Sire, att one and half yojana-s of distance from here Sage Sharabhanga, a great saint of virtue, and an efficacious 
sage with sun-like resplendence dwells, you shall quickly approach him for he advises you opportunely... [3-4-20-21]

Shlok 22- 23a: "Rama you go safely on burying me in a pit... this is the age-old custom for those demons that lost vitality... those that 
are inhumed in pit, to them there will be the worlds of manes..." [3-4-22, 23a]

Shlok 23b- 24a: "And on saying thus to Rama that Viradha who is hurt by arrows became heaven-worthy on leaving his body. [3-4-23b, 24a]

Shlok 24b- 25- 26: And Raghava on hearing those words of the demon ordered Lakshmana, "Lakshmana, a very deep pit be dug for this furious and 
ferocious reprobate in this forest, as though for an elephant..." On saying to Lakshmana that a trench shall be dug...' 
then Rama repressively placed his foot on the throat of Viradha, and stood by. [3-4-24b, 25, 26]

Shlok 27: Then, on taking a digging tool Lakshmana dug a deep pit beside the great soul Viradha. [3-4-27]

Shlok 28: On releasing his throat from the stamping of Rama, he that long eared, lurid voiced Viradha is ensconced in that pit while 
he is still blaring with his horrific voice. [3-4-28]

Shlok 29: Those deftly victorious ones Rama and Lakshmana who compose themselves in a given fight, both have gladly raised that Viradha, 
a ghoulish one in fight, a terrifying demon who is still blaring, with all their might and hurled him into the pit. [3-4-29]

Shlok 30: On observing the indestructibility of that demon with any weapon, however sharp it might be, those two best ones among men 
that are very expertly skilled have thought over well and undertook the elimination of that great demon in a pit. [3-4-30]

Shlok 31: Viradha himself preferred his death at the hands of Rama and desired for a long to be killed by Rama and that forest walker 
himself appraised that, "Killing me with any weapon is impossible..." [3-4-31]

Shlok 32: On listening to that which is said by Viradha, Rama resolved his mind to cast him into pit, and when that mighty demon is 
being flung into the pit the whole forest blared with that demon's cries. [3-4-32]

Shlok 33: Rama and Lakshmana felt happy by way of their look in burying Viradha in the pit of the earth, and on burying him they two 
felt rejoiced for gone is the fear in that great forest, and within the pit they have also concealed him with boulders in 
order to make it a burial-chamber to the departed soul. [3-4-33]

[Commentary] Everywhere Rama patiently performs these funeral rites, whether it is demon, eagle or a monkey, if dead in his presence. 
Here also, Viradha's grave is covered with stones and boulders, as a kind of Stonehenge.

Shlok 34: Then they two who have dazzling golden bows have eliminated that demon and retrieved Seetha, and they gladly journeyed on 
in that great forest like the two entities abiding on the skies, namely the Sun and Moon. [3-4-34]

[Commentary] The simile of sun and moon is of some importance. It will not be clear as to, who is compared with Sun and who with Moon, 
unless some ancient commentaries are touched. Rama is compared with Chandra, the Moon, because, Moon will not travel without 
his wives. All the celestial stars are the wives of the Moon, and they twinkle before the Moon's arrival, in order to welcome 
him into the night. Hence Rama is suffixed with Chandra, compounding to Sri Ramachandra. On the other hand, Sun does not 
travel along with his wife, namely Chaya, the Shadow, but she always will be at his hind. We the living beings are in between 
the Sun and his wife Chaya. If we face Sun in the morning times, she will be at our back, and in the evenings, when the 
Sun is at our back, Chaya, shadow will be in front of us, reminding us of our lengthening shadow of life. Thus we are in 
between the light and shadow. The Sun is also called karma saakshi, [Witness of Deeds.] Our own shadow, shortens with the 
ascending Sun and lengthens as the dusk of our day or life increases. Hence Sun's travel is wife-less one, and Lakshmana 
is thus compared with the Sun, for he does not have his wife travelling with him now. And Lakshmana is another karma saakshi 
[Witness of Events] in the Ramayana. In another way of commenting it is said that both of them are said to be moon-like 
in their appeasing personalities and sun-like in their radiant valour.



The episode of Viraadha assumes some importance in Hindu mythology. It may be observed 
that Viraadha drops down Seetha, lifts and carries Rama and Lakshmana far away from Seetha, where Rama and Lakshmana kill 
Viraadha. aadhyaatma raamaayana which occurs in the  chapter 61 of
brahmaanmda puraana also narrates this episode of Viradha as a one to one fight, herein Rama 
affronts and kills him straight. But in Valmiki Ramayana, Viradha takes away Seetha first and then Rama and Lakshmana, too. 
A question arises as to why the demon should snatch Seetha away and later carry Rama and Lakshmana to a distant place from 
Seetha. It is part of the scheme that Rama kills no demon or sinner in the presence of Seetha, including Ravana, for she 
is that benevolent one to all the sinners and pardons them if surrendered in faith at her feet, as an incarnation of Goddess 
Lakshmi. Our concern here is with skaanda purana , a Shiva Puraana, in which Viradha's episode 
is explained detailedly. The skaanda puraana puts it as:



On seeing Seetha Viraaadha thought, " She is the Supreme goddess through whom heavens can be obtained by salvation and also 
release from the bondage [of demon's body ] On just seeing Her, relieved is this body cage, so with all my devotion, I steal 
Her ." etc. Hence vi raadha meant to be verily, devout, like Radha of Krishna. When chased 
and hurt by Rama and Lakshmana, the demon releases Seetha, but carries both the brothers away. For this distancing Rama 
and Lakshmana from Seetha, it is said that Rama does not kill any demon in the presence of Seetha, for she graciously condones 
the mischief of the demons, if they are true devotees.



Again in skaanda puraana, at the end of this Viraaadha episode, the phala shruti [Fruit 
of Listening] it is narrated as:



SARGA 5
------------------------------

[Text] Rama after killing demon Viradha enters the hermitage of Sage Sharabhanga, as advised by the dying demon Viradha 
			in the previous episode. Sage Sharabhanga refuses the invitation of Indra to come to heaven, but awaits the 
			arrival of Rama to see him with his own eyes. After seeing Rama, Seetha and Lakshmana, and also showing next 
			course of their journey, that Sage enters the yogic fire and ascends to Brahma's abode.

Shlok 1: After killing that stupendously mighty demon Viradha in forest, then Rama comfortingly embraced Seetha, and spoke to his 
brother Lakshmana who is beaming forth with resplendence. [3-5-1]

Shlok 2b- 3a: "Difficult is this impassable forest, nor we are forest inhabitants either... let's go quickly to that ascetically rich 
sage Sharabhanga..." [3-5-2b, 3a]

Shlok 3b- 4: On his approach at the hermitage of Sage Sharabhanga, a sage with a divine effect and the one with a purified soul, saw 
a great wonder at the nearby of that hermitage of Sharabhanga.[3-5-3b, 4]

Shlok 5- 6- 7a: Rama has seen Indra, the lord of three worlds, with a radiant body that has the coupled radiance of Sun and Fire, mounted 
on a great chariot that does not touch the earth, wearing greatly brilliant ornaments and attired in spotless dress, while 
the other divinities are attending, and many more selfsame great-souls are worshipping him. [3-5-5, 6, 7a]

Shlok 7b- 8: Rama saw at his very nearby a chariot yoked with green horses that traverses in firmament, which in its splendour is either 
like the noontime sun, or a cluster of silver clouds, or like the silvern sphere of the moon. [3-5-7b, 8]

Shlok 9- 10a: He saw the stainless parasol of Indra, marvellously garlanded and shining forth, and the exemplary and invaluable royal 
fanning instruments with golden handles, which two best female celestials are handling and fanning at Indra's head sides 
with them. [3-5-9, 10a]

[Commentary] Comment: The royal umbrella and fanning instruments of Hindu order are of particular type, in comparison with their European 
counterparts. These chamara instruments will be made from the bushy long, silver-white hair of chamara animal, a Himalayan 
beast, [Bos grunniens] and the hair will be studded into a golden or silver handle. These are not for actual air circulation 
but they are royal insignias.

Shlok 10b- 11a: And the celestials like gandharva-s, amara-s, siddhaa-s and very many great sages as well are extolling Indra who is abiding 
in firmament. [3-5-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 12a: On seeing Indra speaking there to sage Sharabhanga, Rama spoke to Lakshmana. [3-5-11b, 12a]

Shlok 12b- 13: Rama then on pointing out the chariot expressed his own amazement saying, "Lakshmana see this wonderful chariot that includes 
effulgence and auspiciousness as well, and that abides in firmament, and highly luminous like the Sun... [3-5-12b, 13]

Shlok 14: "Of which horses we have earlier heard from our teachers telling that they belong to Indra, the Chief Invitee in Vedic rituals, 
they are these divinely green horses that now abide in the firmament, and definitely these must be Indra's horses... [3-5-14]

Shlok 15- 16- 17: "And oh, manly-tiger Lakshmana, those that are there in hundreds and hundreds around Indra, those youthful ones with their 
ear-ornaments and swords in hands, with wide and broad chests, with club shaped arms, and clad in glimmering red garments, 
all are like tigers, all are unapproachable, all of them are wearing ornamental chains on their chest-place that are akin 
to flaring fires, and in their appearance, Soumitri, they always bear a look of twenty-five-year-olds... [3-5-15, 16, 17]

Shlok 18: "The age factor of gods remains constant at the age that appears for these nice-looking Tigerly-men, so they say... 
for gods are immortals and they will be ever young... [3-5-18]

Shlok 19: "Stay for a moment Lakshmana along with Vaidehi, until I know clearly about that resplendent one on that chariot... [3-5-19]

Shlok 20: On saying to Lakshmana stay there only...' Rama proceeded towards the hermitage of Sage Sharabhanga.. [3-5-20]

Shlok 21: Then, on seeing Rama arriving there, Indra, bade farewell to Sage Sharabhanga and said this to the celestials attending 
him. [3-5-21]

Shlok 22- 23: "Here comes that Rama...before he talks to me, you lead him towards his vow, after completing the result of his incarnation, 
then only he is eligible to see me... Let him be a victorious and accomplished one, then I will see him very soon...for 
that will happen very soon... A great deed is to be verily performed by him that is highly impossible for others... [3-5-22, 
23

[Commentary] Comment: This verse in Gorakhpur version is said to be containing improper word placements thus confusing in its meaning. 
Some ancient manuscripts are said to contain this as,

[Commentary] The same verse in Dharmaakuutam is like this,

[Commentary] In any case, the import is this "Now he that Rama can not talk to me, and after getting the results of his incarnation, 
i.e., elimination of Ravana, then only he can see me..."

Shlok 24: Then that Enemy-destroyer Indra adoringly bade farewell to the sage, and travelled to heavens by the chariot with its green 
horses. [3-5-24]

[Commentary] Comment: Vishnu is said to have instructed all the divinities to not to talk to him during his human incarnation on earth 
as Rama. If any divine being comes into direct contact and conducts a dialogue, Rama's identity as Vishnu is revealed, and 
Ravana will apprehend that and then revokes his boon of not to be killed by any divine being. As long as Ravana believes 
Rama to be a human being, so long he dares any human to confront, because he slighted humans when seeking his boon. Ravana 
can be ended only by Rama, but not by others. Hence, Indra departed from there before the arrival of Rama.

Shlok 25: On the transit of that Thousand-eyed Indra, Raghava with his adherents [namely Lakshmana and Seetha,] came nearby the 
Sage Sharabhanga, who is sitting nearby the altar of fire. [3-5-25]

[Commentary] The word paricChada means, that which encloses anything, apart from its ordinary meaning, attendants, retinue etc. Here 
the enclosures for Rama are Seetha and Lakshmana. As with any deity in a sanctum sanctorum, who is enclosed by impregnable 
walls and sanctimonious atmosphere, Rama is enclosed by that impregnable Lakshmana like a firewall, where the sanctimonious 
environ is the presence of Seetha, near at Rama.

Shlok 26: Touching the feet of that Sage Sharabhanga Rama along with Seetha and Lakshmana, and duly permitted and invited by that 
Sage Sharabhanga they sat there, as they obtained a shelter. [3-5-26]

Shlok 27: Then, Raghava enquired with sage about the arrival of Indra and Sage Sharabhanga narrated all that to him. [3-5-27]

Shlok 28: "Oh! Rama, that boon-giver Indra wishes to take me to Brahma's abode, which is achieved by me by my arduous ascesis and 
that which is unattainable for them with their souls unconquered... [3-5-28]

Shlok 29: "On knowing that you are course is nearby, oh! Manly-tiger, and without seeing my dear guest I do not wish to go to Brahma's 
abode... [3-5-29]

[Commentary] Sage Sharabhanga, with his sixth sense came to know that Vishnu is coming this way and will become his dear guest. He thus 
is obliged to receive Rama in his hermitage. It is his first priority than escaping to Brahma's abode. The sage with his 
own arduous penance attained that travel to Brahma's heavens and he can go there anytime. But seeing Rama, who is now a 
human incarnate, with his own human eyes is prime ordeal to that Sage. Secondly, ascending to heavens with mortal body is 
an impracticable affair. Hence the mortal body is to be cast off here only. If that mortal body is cast off, as per the 
request of Indra, the sage's mortal eyes cannot see Rama, for Rama leaves this earth after fulfilling his vow of eradicating 
evil, and equally, a Sage of high order like Sharabhanga, on going to Brahma's abode will not return as an earthling. Hence 
seeing and receiving Rama is his priority now.

Shlok 30: " Having met with you, a virtuous one and a great soul as you are, oh, manly-tiger, I wish to go through undesirable lesser 
heavens to Brahma's abode, the highest [3-5-30]

[Commentary] In Gorakhpur version it is avaram, a+varam . The translation will therefore be 'undesirable heavens/lesser heavens...' 
If there is difference between paradise and heaven, this lesser one is paradise; the ordinary swarga of Indra, 
where the departed soul's merit is metered and count down starts with the enjoyment of heavenly comforts. As and when the 
accumulated merit neutralises there, that soul has to take rebirth in the karmic cycle. kshiiNe puNye martya lokam pravishanti... 
This sage does not wish to go there, because he earned fartherest heavens like Brahma's abode or tridiva patham 
etc., by his penance. And those lesser heavens are as cited by Krishna in Bhagavad Gita aabrahma bhavanaallokaaH punaraavR^itti 
na arjuna... 8-16: and here Krishna also says maam upetyatu... 'In me repose yourself...' This 'Me,' is
tridivam... and tripaadvibuuti , as cited by puruSa suukta n its hymn paadosya vishvaa bhuutaani, 
tripaadasya amR^itam divi...' etc. Dharmaakootam puts it as brahma lokam gamiSyaami tridivam deva sevitam... 
without separating this concept into two kinds of heavens, namely paradise and Brahma's abode. Hence there is nothing enjoyable 
in any of the said heavens, than having a glance at you. Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 31: "Oh! Tigerly-man, non-diminishing are the abodes achieved by me either in Brahma's abode or yonder than paradise...you take 
them all...that are mine achieved by me ascesis..." So said Sage Sharabhanga to Rama. [3-5-31]

[Commentary] Comment: The sage is dedicating all his achievements of penance unto god, without any ahamtva buddhi , mine-ness. 
This is called phala samarpaNa. The fruits of pious achievements are to be dedicated in the divine without the 
concept 'I am the doer thus I shall enjoy...' Even in the daily worship we are supposed to dedicate all that we have done, 
with oblating water saying ' karomi yad yat sakalam parsmai naaraayaNaayeti samarpayaami... 'Whatever is done, 
in all its entirety, I dedicate it unto the Supreme...' And Govindaraja observes, whatever that is acquired by the sage 
is his wealth. So the heavenly abodes are his only wealth as of now, and they all are surrendered to Rama, as guest-worship.

Shlok 32: Thus said by the Sage Sharabhanga to that Manly-tiger Rama, being the scholar in all the scriptures he spoke this sentence 
to that sage. [3-5-32]

Shlok 33: "I alone can gain all those worlds, oh! Great Saint, I now seek a place to dwell here in this forest as indicated by you... 
[Apparent meaning.] [3-5-33]



"I will however take all those worlds of yours, for you have waited for me and dedicated whatever you achieved by your penance 
at my tri-feet, as atithi satkaara, honouring guests - ' leaving 'the doer and doing' attachment, 
and without desire to enjoy the fruits of works, as a karma phala tyaagi . For now, show me 
a place to dwell in this forest like an ordinary human being - [Implicit meaning according to Govindaraja.]



"I will win-over all those worlds myself, as Kshatriya-s are not supposed to take any donations; they either have to won 
by them or acquire them for themselves, just show me a place to dwell - [Maheshvara Tirtha.]



"Everything merges in me alone, for I alone gave all these to you, and you also dedicated the same in me, without the concept 
of doer and doing - [which again is reiterated in Bhagavad Gita -labhatecha tataH kaamaan mayaiva vihitaan 
|| 7-22 ' All the desires of the adherent like Brahma's abode, immortality etc., are acquired at my grace.' for now show 
me a place to live - [Another concept. tani sloki.]

[Commentary] Comment: Thus aahara means gaining, win-over, or snatching, stealing. Hence Rama as a king refutes that donation, 
telling that he alone will acquire those worlds, in an explicit meaning, that conceals Rama's identity as Vishnu. Vishnu 
has Himself given those merits to this sage, as said in Bhagavadgita. Implicitly all the merits of earthly beings merge 
into that Absolute ultimately, and hence any fresh donation from the sage is negated. The dictionary meaning of aahara 
is provider, fetcher, and Vishnu Himself is the fetcher, provider. In another way, aahara is to take, or snatch 
away, or merge and thus Rama is said to express 'I snatch away everything and anything done by my true devotee...for he 
does not do it for his own sake...' This is said to be God's karma phala swiikaara 'receiving of the fruits of 
work...

Shlok 34: Thus said by Raghava, who is like Indra in strength, that supremely intellectual Sage Sharabhanga again spoke this sentence 
this way. [3-5-34]

Shlok 35: "Here, oh! Rama, a great resplendent sage named Suteekshna, lives in this forest...a virtuous and a self-disciplined one, 
and he will do something benignant to you... [3-5-35]

Shlok 36: "You approach Sage Suteekshna and to you he will arrange housing in his auspicious and dpleasant place woods of hermits... 
[3-5-36]

Shlok 37: " Following opposite to its flow you may follow this River Mandaakini that carries flower-ferries, then you can reach there 
at Sage Suteekshna's hermitage...] [3-5-37]

[Commentary] Comment: Mandaakini is the name of River Ganga, and hence any river with continuous flow is affectionately called Ganga, 
like Dakshina Ganga, Bhaagiirathi etc. So this name of Mandakini is to mean a river here, but not Ganga. Later in Kishkindha 
also River Pampa is called Mandakini, at times.

Shlok 38: "This is the only way, oh, manly-tiger, and oh, sire, see me for a moment, till I forsake these body parts of mine, like 
a snake casting its withered moult... [3-5-38]

[Commentary] Sage Sharabhanga said, eSha panthaa naravyaaghraH meaning that 'this is the only recourse, oh, manly-tiger.' Here 
Rama asked Sage Sharabhanga to show a place to dwell. Sharabhanga's hermitage itself will now become vacant after the sage's 
ascension to heavens. But it is not shown to Rama to stay, instead yet another distant place is shown. All these Sages and 
Saints show only one path that Rama, Seetha and Lakshmana have to travel, i.e., towards Ravana, the evil on earth. From 
here they are directed to Sage Suteekshna's hermitage, there from to Sage Agastya's hermitage, and there from, to still 
deeper place in forests, called Panchavati. According to Kaikeyi's banishment Rama need not travel this far, but could have 
resided in some near-about forests of River Ganga. But one after the other, either demons who became celestials or sages 
who are going to become divinities, all usher Rama southward, i.e., towards the dominions of demons, whom Rama has to eradicated 
from earth. 'If Rama were to enter into Panchavati, a powerful dominion of demons like Khara and Dushana, alleging their 
loyalties to Ravana, it is definite that an encounter will ensue and Rama will start eradicating one after the other, and 
ultimately ending with Ravana...' this appears to be the logic of all the sages. As such Rama is asked to go on travelling 
towards the evil side of the earth, for all of the sages know about Rama's destination

Shlok 39: Then that hymnist on invoking the sacred fire and offering oblations with clarified butter into it, that radiant sage Sharabhanga 
entered that sacred fire. [3-5-39]

Shlok 40: The fire burnt down that great soul Sharabhanga from head-hair to body hair and thus his shrunk skin, bones and whatever 
flesh and blood are there, they are also burnt completely. [3-5-40]

[Commentary] Then the question arises whether Sage Sharabhanga wilfully encompassed the sin of suicide or not? Not so, because it is 
said that his self-immolation is not in any mortal fire, but in some yogic fire, which he invoked and sanctified with hymns. 
If it were to be an ordinary pyre, the mortal body do not burn completely to ashes as the skull and vertebral bones remain, 
for immersion into holy waters after a while. Here it is said that nothing remained. Further scriptures lay it down that: 
Hence Sage Sharabhanga, having seen Rama, got that divine knowledge and there is nothing left for him to accomplish with 
his mortal body, and hence entered the holy fire. Those that are superior in character and virtue, even the of Fire, Agni 
Deva, cannot even touch, rather provides a coolant condition in His lap. It is the same with Seetha in Yuddha Kanda and 
it also happened with Queen Chandramati, the virtuous wife of Emperor Harishchandra, one of the forefathers of Rama. Thus 
said in Dharmaakuutam:



Those who obtained divine knowledge about this mortal body, and those that cannot practice anuSThaana their daily 
chores, or with any incapability, and those that have left house as holder, and desiccated, could give up their mortal bodies 
into fire, waters or falling from mountain peaks.

Shlok 41: He that Sage Sharabhanga, then reappeared as an youngster in the semblance of Fire, o\n resurrecting from that altar of 
fire he shone-forth. [3-5-41]

[Commentary] Comment: The age of celestial is always constant like twenty-five-year-olds, as said above by Rama at 3-5-17/18.

Shlok 42: He that Sage Sharabhanga, transcending the ethereal worlds of fire-worshippers, of saints, of great souls, and also of divinities, 
has ascended to Brahma's abode. [3-5-42]

Shlok 43: He that meritorious and best Brahman Sharabhanga has seen Brahma in Brahma's abode, and Brahma too, on seeing that Brahman 
happily spoke to him... "Welcome..." [3-5-43]



SARGA 6
------------------------------

[Text] After the heavenward journey of Sage Sharabhanga, Rama is approached by
          others sages and hermits. They inform him about the atrocities of demons around that
          place. They all ask Rama to eradicate the menace and Rama avows to do so, in order to
          keep up the tranquillity of those hermitages, and also to obliterate the menace of demons
          from earth.

Shlok 1: On Sage Sharabhanga attaining heaven, groups of sages assembled and approached
  Rama of Kakutstha dynasty, who is glowing with resplendence. [3-6-1]

Shlok 2: The sages called Vaikahanasa-s, [who are born out of the nails of Prajaapati, the
  first ruler of mankind,] also Vaalakhilyaa-s, [those born from His hair,] and those from the
  water of His feet-wash, and those that thrive on drinking rays of sun and moon alone, and those
  that pound with stones and others who thrive on leaves alone, are those sages... [3-6-2]

[Commentary] The 
 samprakshaala
  are kind of sages said be washing their interior
  body with water, a yogic measure called dhouli prakriya , and also otherwise attributed
  to wash their vessels after a meal, without preserving any food for the next meal, for god would
  automatically give their daily bread. The sages called ashma kuTTa, are that kind of
  sages who pound their bodies with stones, and thus they pound grain with stones.

Shlok 3: Some of them use their own teeth to grid the grain they eat, and some who perform
  ascesis in neck-deep water, and some who sleep with their head resting on their shoulders or on
  chests without using any kind of bed, and some who do not use any kind of beds either, and some
  who meditate without any repose sitting in an enclosure without any leg-space. [3-6-3]

Shlok 4: And some sages whose food is water alone, or air alone to some, like that some who
  meditate staying in sky and some who sleep on bare ground itself. [3-6-4]

Shlok 5: Thus some are dwellers on high-peaked places with their senses controlled, and
  some are wearers of wet cloths, always reciting name or hymn japa and like that some who meditate
  with five kinds of fire around them. [3-6-5]

Shlok 6: All have Vedic resplendence and firm yogic control, and they have arrived at the
  hermitage of Sage Sharabhanga for Rama. [3-6-6]

Shlok 7: Those virtuous sages coming together in groups neared Rama, the best beholder of
  virtue, and said to that supreme one in virtue. [3-6-7]

[Commentary] The word 
 abhi gamya
  is nearly approaching, coming nearby, at a
  destination that is Rama. The Omni-Luminescent, , emerged in Kakutstha dynasty as Rama. Knowing
  that, all the sages of higher knowledge have arrived at their 'destination' in this mortal world
  itself... Maheshvara Tirtha.

Shlok 8: "You are the supreme charioteer born in Ikshvaku dynasty hence you are the
  protector of earth under your control. As with Indra, the ruler of divinities you are a similar
  ruler for us. [3-6-8]



Though born in Ikshvaku dynasty you are the Supreme Charioteer, hence you are the
  same Supreme Charioteer of this Earth and earthlings too, as with Indra who protects divinities,
  you are our protector.

[Commentary] We have not heard of any chariot or horse being utilised by Rama, let alone in
  some episodes of his student days, because he is more a foot soldier than a horse/chariot rider.
  How these sages suddenly say that Rama is a speedy charioteer, is the question. This mahaa
  rathaH concept is on the analogy of Krishna the charioteer in Bharata. In Vedanta, the human
  body is frequently referred as ratha, as in ashva kraante rathaH kraante
  vishNukraante vasu.ndharaa... , Sec. I-37 Mahanaaraayano panishad: 'O, earth that is
  traversed by a horse [in Vedic rituals,] a chariot, [great souls, why they all when] Vishnu
  himself treaded on you as Trivikrama... hence I pray you...' Hence the chariot, drawn by the
  five-senses as its horses, and the earth are also brought and said here by sages.
  Krishna-Arjuna's chariot too had five-horses. Here the sages with controlled senses, namely
  horses, are asking the one who chariots/spins the earth and earthlings, to take off the children
  of lesser gods, namely demons, far away from humans where humans are god controlled species.

Shlok 9: "You are well renowned in all the three worlds by your repute and valour, and in
  you abounding are the virtues like truthfulness and devotion to your father, and even
  righteousness too, is there. [3-6-9]

[Commentary] The above is the apparent meaning. The subtext is "Are you, the supreme
  charioteer of Ikshvaku dynasty alone, like Indra for celestial beings? And are you the supreme
  charioteer of this earth and earthlings alone? Not so...you are the Supreme of the whole
  Universe, therefore your reputation is well known in all the three worlds. Thus you the
  Omni-Luminescent entered in Ikshvaku dynasty in the form of Rama, to perform your duties like
  abiding by father's word, with your usual qualities like abounding virtuousness, safeguarding
  dharma in respect of your own creation/ maintenance..." Thus this is the confrontation-like-
  addressing of the enlightened sages. Maheshvara Tirtha.

Shlok 10: "You are the great-souled one, knower of righteousness and a patron of virtue...
  such as you are, on approaching you we beg to state something for which we may please be
  excused... [3-6-10]

[Commentary] Special supplication to god is a waste. His mercy has to flows on its own
  accord. Why beg him to perform his own duty? If by mistake, an appeal is made to god to alleviate
  a personal problem, his pardon may to be begged, but he is not be begged to do favours. Here the
  sages on one hand say that 'you have come here in the incarnation of Rama to eradicate evil...'
  At the same time, they say 'we have an appeal for the same...' This begging off, is as per social
  custom, made to the apparent ruler of the kingdom, not to the innate Divine.

Shlok 11: "Oh! , very great a-dharma, wrongness, will occur to that king who takes the sixth
  part of the country's produce as cess, but does not safeguard his subjects like his own sons...
  [3-6-11]

[Commentary] "Protection of subjects is but natural to all kings, but some kings do so for
  a particular reason, hence this appeal of ours" thus say the sages...Govindaraja. "Though you
  incarnated yourself to protect the entire universe, so you have to protect us too...but why a
  special appeal of ours when you are duty bound... that means, we with an unbearable angst of ours
  make this appeal according to the social custom, but not to harass you. Hence we remind you,
  Rama, of your kingly duties to safeguard us..." Maheshvara Tirtha. atra a
  pramaadena prajaaH samrakShaNiiyaaH - rakShaNaat uttama loka avaaptiH - arakShaNe doShaH ca
  bhavati iti suucitam - dharmaakuutam

Shlok 12- 13: "A king shall treat all the subjects of kingdom as his own sons, and he shall
  protect them as though he is ready to save them at the cost of his own lives, and he who will
  always be endeavouring in that manner will attain permanent renown lasting for many for many
  years to come, and thereby he attains a prosperous place even in Brahma's abode... [3-6-12,
  3]

Shlok 14: "He who righteously protects his subjects will get one fourth of the merit of
  great duty-bound deeds performed by each individual sage, say yajna-s, ascesis, meditation etc.
  performances. [3-6-14]

Shlok 15: "O, Rama, though you are there as protector for the hermitages, suchlike this one,
  where the most reverent Brahmans are there numerously, they look as though forsaken, for they are
  being demolished by demons, devastatingly... [3-6-15]

Shlok 16: "Come and see many of the bodies of the sages, the contemplative souls, that are
  variously killed by ghastly demons in the forest... [3-6-16]

Shlok 17: "At Pampa riverside, and alongside of River Mandakini, and at the surroundings of
  Mt. Chitrakuta also, this hideous warfare is being done... [3-6-17]

Shlok 18: "Thus. we are not able to tolerate this injustice to the sages, being executed in
  this forest by the demons with fiendish deeds, in a ghastly manner... [3-6-18]

Shlok 19: "Therefore we present ourselves before you as you are our protector, for the
  purpose of your protecting us that are being killed by nightwalkers... please safe guard us...
  [3-6-19]

[Commentary] It is said as 'you are the only refuge' because there is no pre or post verbs
  for this sharaNyam, thus you aare the protector of all worlds. sharaNa artham
  is taken as to 'place us at our appropriate place,' namely in the abode after total salvation;
  sam upasthitaa or sam upaagamaa as in other versions, we have come here with
  vishvaasa, faithfulness, sharaNaagati , servitude, kainkarya ,
  surrender etc.; naH paripaalaya protect us and with this word, it is again repeated in
  next verse as paripaalaya naH ; and later in the verse the request - from what to be
  protected is said. That is aniSTa nivR^itti ruupa phala praarthana, 'removal of that
  which is undesirable.' That is to say: 'we better be given total salvation rather than killed by
  these demons, which is half way through our exercise to attain total salvation.' is the subtext
  of the speech of sages.

Shlok 20: "Other than you, oh, valorous Rama, no way-out is deducible on this earth, hence
  oh, prince, protect all of us from the demons... [3-6-20]

[Commentary] There is no way-out on this earth, for that matter of fact in all the
  universe, when the 'earth' becomes upa lakshNa for all worlds. This is in consonance
  with the scripture's saying, na anyaH panthaa vidyate ayanaaya...puruSa suukta R.V. X-90
  and thus those sages say 'we are contaminated with limited fruition of our practices parimita
  phalatva, and other suchlike limitations. But you are evident here...before our naked
  eyes...so protect us from the demons...' where the demons, raakshsebhyaH comes to mean
  sarva aniSTaaH, all earthly undesirables. Again coupled with the vocation of 'Oh
  Prince...' it is said as: "you have come here like a prince of Ayodhya, unlike a wild boar, or a
  fish or a man-lion, your earlier incarnations, so remember us and give us salvation...

Shlok 21: On hearing all that is said by the sages of great penance, he that virtue souled
  Rama said this unto all of the sages. [3-6-21]

Shlok 22: "Unapt is this way of speaking to me...command me, for I am at your behest... just
  for my personal purpose I had to enter the forests.... [3-6-22]

Shlok 23: "I entered this forest as ordered by my father and even to obliterate the
  unconscionable state of yours owing to the misdeeds of demons. [3-6-23]

[Commentary] Rama's saying that 'I am at your command, oh sages...' is indicative of his
  nature of bhakta jana vashya... in the control of his ardent devotees, so no special
  prayer for salvation is needed. In the expression kevalene aatma/sva kaaryeNa... the
  word kevala is not a kevala pada ... just a word... it indicates a radical
  sense, like 'for that purpose only' meaning to eradicate demonic menace only, I entered the
  forest...' Because the sheSin has to come to the rescue of sheSi, the servant.
  So 'safeguarding my own servants is my own responsibility and also pleasure, that is why I
  entered the forests, where my father's orders are nimitta, a concomitant factor, and not
  that I entered these forest due to my karma, or misfortune...' Govindaraja. According to
  Maheshvara Tirtha 'My coming to forests at the orders of my father is a fact but concomitant
  factor in this forest trek is your request to eliminate the demons, which I will do...' This is
  evident meaning. The latent one is "I have entered these forests only at my own desire to
  eradicate demons, for they are doing wrong to you, my servants sheSin-s, and I abide by
  you, my devotees...' c.f.,

[Commentary] Griffit's Translit: I wait the hests of all of you. / I by mine own
  occasion led / This mighty forest needs must tread, / And while I keep my sire's decree / Your
  lives from threatening foes will free.

Shlok 24: "Perchance I have come for the achievement of your purpose, such as I am, dwelling
  in this forest will immensely be fruitful to me... [3-6-24]

Shlok 25: "I wish to eliminate demons, the enemies of sages, in war... let the sages behold
  my valour, and my brother's valour in doing so..." Thus Rama promised the sages. [3-6-25]

Shlok 26: Thus giving his aegis to the sages, that valiant Rama who is firmly virtue-souled,
  journeyed towards Sage Suteekshna with Lakshmana and the sages, and along with the one given by
  Honourable Janaka, namely Seetha. [3-6-26]



SARGA 7
------------------------------



Rama arrives at the hermitage of Sage Suteekshna, as directed by Sage Sharabhanga in 
the previous chapter and asks the sage to show a place to dwell. Suteekshna asks Rama to stay at his 
own hermitage, which has no other problems than the wild animals that come in herds and make blaring 
noises. Rama wishes to kill those animals that hamper the tranquillity of hermits living therein, but 
having observed the kindness of Suteekshna towards those wild animals, however disturbing they may be, 
Rama refrains to kill them, and would like to go to any other place than this. They spend that night 
there.

Shlok 1: Rama, the enemy-scorcher, has gone towards the threshold of the hermitage of Sage Suteekshna 
along with his brother Lakshmana and Seetha, also along with those Brahmans who accompanied him all 
the way. [4-7-1]

Shlok 2: He travelling on a long way, and on crossing rivers with plenty of waters has seen a 
tranquil mountain towering like great Mt. Meru. [3-7-2]

Shlok 3: Then those best ones from Ikshvaku dynasty, those two Raghava-s along with Seetha have 
entered the forest which will always be full with diverse trees. [3-7-3]

Shlok 4: Entering that perilous forest with its many a flower and fruit bearing trees, they have 
seen the hermitage in a reclusive place adorned with rows of jute cloths as though garlanding it. [3-7-4]

Shlok 5: There on seeing the ascetically rich Sage Suteekshna sitting in yogic posture with his 
body bearing lotus-like blotches of soil, Rama dutifully spoke to him. [3-7-5]

[Commentary] Here it is said the soil on the sage's body has taken lotus-like blotches. Certain 
yogic methods do not care outward bathing of body. Usually the bath is prescribed three times a day, 
but hermits of a sort leave away that bodily bathing, because the sweat and soil recurs immediately 
after each bath on this impure body. So they stop taking outward bath and concentrate on cleansing the 
inner space.

Shlok 6: "Oh! godly sage I am Rama, I have come to see you, hence oh, knower of virtue, oh, great 
sage, oh, one with truthfulness as your courage, please talk to me..." [3-7-6]

Shlok 7: Then that sage having seen that brave and best proponent of virtue, Rama, embraced him 
with both of his hands, and spoke this sentence. [3-7-7]

Shlok 8: "Welcome to you Rama, best of Raghu dynasty and the best patron of truth, and when you 
presently caught this hermitage unprepared this has become a well-lorded one... [3-7-8]

Shlok 9- 10a: "I am awaiting for you only, oh, greatly renowned one, without my ascent to heavens by 
casting off this body on the earth's plane, oh, brave one, for I have heard that you have arrived at 
Chitrakuta after you are repudiated from your kingdom... [3-7-9]

[Commentary] This heaven ' deva loka heaven is negated for total salvation. Total salvation 
is at your tri-feet, tridiva. So 'I have not ascended to heavens, which causes rebirth after 
the decline of merit, thus I am waiting for your arrival for Total Salvation, moksha...' So said the 
sage to Rama. Govindaraja. "You birthed in Raghu's dynasty for the elimination of Ravana, and also foregone 
your kingdom and you are coming this way. So I am waiting for your graceful look, without going to heavens 
leaving the body. Should I leave the body and go to heavens, I cannot see parama puruSa , The 
Absolute, in you... so I did not cast off this body...' Thus said the sage to Rama. Maheshvara Tirtha.

Shlok 10b- 11: "The king of gods and the chief invitee in hundred sacrifices Indra approached me, and 
that great deity said me that I have conquered all the worlds by my meritorious deeds... [3-7-10, 11]

Shlok 12: "Let me bequeath those worlds that are cherished by gods and sages alike, but which are 
won over by me by my ascesis, and you enjoy in them with your wife and with your brother Lakshmana... 
[3-7-12]

[Commentary] This sage Suteekshna too is dedicating all his merit accrued by his penance at the 
feet of Vishnu. This is the same effort of dedication, which Sage Sharabhanga offered, to Rama at 3-5-33 
of this canto. Any thing accrued by human effort and energy, if dedicated at the feet of god, is doubly 
meritorious and establishes a selflessness of the devotee. Even in any daily worship it will be concluded 
with a saying, ye tat phalam parameshwara arpaNamastu... i.e., whatever is the result of this 
worship it is dedicated in the Supreme...

Shlok 13: That self-respecting Rama replied the radiant sage with intense asceticism, a great soul 
and an advocate of truth by himself, as Indra would reply to Brahma. [3-7-13]

Shlok 14: "I alone can gain all those worlds, oh, great saint, I now seek a place to dwell here 
in this forest as indicated by you... [3-7-14]

[Commentary] This is the same situation with Sage Sharabhanga in the 5th chapter of this canto. 
This is an allusive saying by Rama. cf. 3-5-33.

Shlok 15: "You are an expert in all affairs, and you are interested in the welfare of all the beings, 
so said the great souled Sage Sharabhanga of Sage Gautama's dynasty..." [So said Rama to the sage.] 
[3-7-15]

Shlok 16: When said thus by Rama, that great sage with world renown spoke sweet worded sentence 
with great pleasure. [3-7-16]

Shlok 17: "You can take delight in this good featured hermitage alone, for groups of sages will 
always be moving here, and this always contains tubers and fruits..." Thus said Sage Suteekshna. [3-7-17]

Shlok 18: "But herds of very large animals will be coming to this hermitage, they return after 
scaring us, of course without killing anyone, and they fear none... [3-7-18]

[Commentary] There is something in this verse. Some translations read mR^iga as deer, 
while some others read it as animals. If they are just deer, the word a + hatvaa , without 
killing, is of no use, for deer is not a carnivorous animal to kill someone. In other versions, this 
verse is a complete recast telling that herds of great size animals come and blare, but do not kill 
or fear any one. Even if it were so, this sage has got a tolerance for them too. And if some latent 
meaning is picked up, the large herds of deer, moving as they like in this hermitage, are said to be 
'luring' the sages, lobhayitbvaa. A presumption arises here. This must be the same 'lure' Seetha 
got on seeing Golden Deer. But Rama raises his bow and arrow to kill these animals that disturb tranquillity 
of hermitage, whether it be deer or other blaring wild animals. So Rama's fury must be at the 'luring 
deer', say Golden Deer, but not at ordinary deer. Thus this usage of 'deer and lure' may be taken as
lakshaNa for lakshita of Ramayana.

Shlok 19- 20a: "Know that no other problem is there other than the animals..." So said the sage. On 
hearing those words of that great sage, that brave elder brother of Lakshmana taking bow and arrow said 
this sentence. [3-7-19, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: "I will eradicate them, oh, greatly blessed one, those animals that will come collectively 
in herds with sharp edged, curve-end arrows... [3-7-20b, 21a]

Shlok 21b- 22a: "But you may be more interested in those animals mercifully, then what will be there 
more painful to you, hence I deem our staying in this hermitage for along will be unbefitting..." So 
said Rama. [3-7-21b, 22a]

Shlok 22b- 23: On saying thus to the sage then Rama came by the twilight, and he paused at it. On worshipping 
the westward vesperal time, Rama arranged a stay for himself along with Seetha and Lakshmana, there 
in that delightful hermitage of Sage Suteekshna. [3-7-22b, 23]

Shlok 23: Then the great soul Sage Suteekshna on completing his evening rituals and on observing 
the fall of night he himself courteously served food that is auspicious and worthy of sages to two of 
the best men, Rama and Lakshmana. [3-7-23]

[Commentary] It may not be construed that Seetha is served with no food, by taking the wording 
that 'two of best men are served food' by the sage. It is usual for the Indian women to take food after 
their husbands or other dependents take it first, then all womenfolk in the house join together to have 
their meal, [for a long time...of course, with their unending chit-chatting...]



SARGA 8
------------------------------

[Text] Rama and others, having spent that night in the hermitage of Sage Suteekshna, start to go from there 
on the next day morning, duly taking permission from the sage. While bidding farewell to Rama and others, 
Sage Suteekshna explains concern about the forests, which are rich natural gifts to human kind and tranquil 
abodes of hermits, and implicitly suggests to Rama, to somehow safeguard them from the demonic activities 
in this Dandaka Aranya, by whom these forests are rendered into graveyards, not even honourable graveyards, 
but stockyards for heaps of dead bodies, bones and skulls, for no faulty reason of the saints and sages.

Shlok 1: Rama along with Soumitri is well revered by Sage Suteekhsna, spent that night there and awoken in the 
morning. [3-8-1]

Shlok 2: Rama got up according to time along with Seetha and touched finely cool water with lotus-fragrance for 
morning bath. [3-8-2]

Shlok 3- 4: Then they all, Vaidehi, Rama and Lakshmana, on worshipping sacred fire and deities dutifully in the 
shelter of the sages in that forest and on seeing the dawning sun, they are reft of their blemishes, 
and then they approached Sage Suteekshna speaking this sentence gently. [3-8-3, 4]

Shlok 5: "We stayed here happily, oh, god, venerated by a venerable one like you, and here we come to ask your 
permission as we wish to journey on, as the sages are hastening us... [3-8-5]

Shlok 6: "We make haste to see the habitats of hermitages in their entirety, and even wish to see the sages with 
meritorious selves living in Dandaka forest... [3-8-6]

Shlok 7: "We wish to have your permission, and that of these eminent sages, who are ever virtuous, self-controlled 
by their ascesis, and who look like the veritable tongues of sacred fire... [3-8-7]

Shlok 8- 9: "We wish to proceed before sun attains an intolerable glare, like an unworthy person of unworthy lineage 
attains wealth in an improper way with much glare..." saying so Rama with Seetha and Lakshmana venerated 
at the feet of that sage Suteekshna. [3-8-8, 9]

Shlok 10: That eminent sage lifted them that are touching his feet, embraced them tightly, and said this sentence 
in all his friendliness. [3-8-10]

Shlok 11: "Proceed in an invulnerable way, Rama, along with Lakshmana, and with this Seetha while she follows 
you closely like a shadow... [3-8-11]

Shlok 12: "See the pleasant thresholds of the hermitages of the dwellers in the forests of Dandaka, oh! Valiant 
one, whose souls are consecrated just by their ascesis... [3-8-2]

Shlok 13- 14- 15: "See the well-flowered woodlands with well-grown fruits and tubers, with herds of best animals and 
peaceful bird flocks... tranquil waters with spreading clusters of bloomed lotuses and water-birds in 
the pools and lakes... eye-pleasing rapids from mountains and you can see pleasant forests loaded with 
the hearty screams of precooks... [3-8-13, 14, 15]

Shlok 16: "My dear Rama, you may go and Soumitri you too also may go... but come again towards this hermitage 
after seeing all of them... [3-8-16]

Shlok 17: Thus said by the sage, Rama in his turn said to him, "so be it..." and having performed circumambulations 
around the sage he started to journey on. [3-8-17]

Shlok 18: Then the broad eyed Seetha gave auspicious quivers and bows to those brothers and then spotless swords 
too. [3-8-18]

Shlok 19: Both of those two Rama and Lakshmana tied their beautiful quivers well on their backs, and took the 
twangy bows and exited from that hermitage to go on their way. [3-8-19]

Shlok 20: Those two Raghava-s, the handsome princes, have swiftly set out when permitted by that august sage, 
wielding bows and swords, and along with Seetha. [3-8-20]



SARGA 9
------------------------------

[Text] Seetha foresees danger in Rama's decision to eliminate the demons in Dandaka forest, without 
			any provocation from their side, at the request of some sages. She narrates an old episode 
			about a sage who in possession of a weapon became violent and cruel.

[Text] 

Shlok 1: To Rama, the scion of Raghu and her husband, who started out when permitted by Sage Suteekshna, Vaidehi 
spoke this with friendly words. [3-9-1]

[Commentary] Seetha addresses Rama with this percept. "Wielding weaponry you are entering into an area where the 
demons are dense, and you intolerantly embark to kill them, thereupon we two get separated, which in 
turn is intolerable to you. So let us leave weapons back at hermitage and go to forests to see sages 
- Govindaraja. "The promise made to sages in eradicating demons is himsaatmaka, injurious; 
they can be won over by ahimsa, non-injurious methods also. None can avert Rama to make a promise, 
nor ask him to deviate from it. Aware of this stubbornness of Rama, her heart felt a foreboding, and 
that love-blind Seetha started telling in a friendlily manner, in view of her friendship with Rama, 
that may disrupt soon.

Shlok 2: "Gross unjust will accrue to any in an abstruse way if his indulgence is enkindled merely by his own 
desire, and in this world it is possible to fend them off, to have a recourse to justness... [3-9-2]

[Commentary] For the first word adharma of Gorakhpur version, there are other words available in other mms 
like yastu dharmam tu and ayam dharma . The critical editions and also Dharmaakuutam 
puts it as ayam dharmaH susuuksmeNa vidhinaa praapyate mahaan... Instead of adharma, ayam 
dharma is there, which changes the negative attitude to positive Then this ayam dharmaH 
translates as 'this dharma, the duty of a prince, which you are going to take-up in the wake of promise 
given to sages, i.e., killing demons, without a valid reason, that which is righteous to you, can be 
performed in a different way...'

Shlok 3- 4a: "Only three self-gratifications, the definite products of desire, are there: one is speaking fallacious 
utterances, which itself is worse, and worst than the other two malefic self-gratifications, where the 
other two are the fascination for other's wife, and the cruelness without enmity... [3-9-3, 4a]

[Commentary] Seetha is foretelling the triggering points in the course of Ramayana. The addictions or self-gratifying 
acts are defined as:



Hunting, sleeping in daytime, abusing others, indulgence in women, three artistic impulses namely music, 
dance and drama, wasteful wandering, are the ten desire. Manu smriti.

Shlok 4b- 5a: "The habit of telling specious words is not there with you in the past nor it will be there in future, 
oh, Raghava, then wherefrom the virtue-ruining desire for other's women can be there... [3-9-4b, 5a]

Shlok 5b- 6: "Oh, king, earlier this vile desire for other's women is absent in you, nor it is there now, unobserved 
is such a desire in any corner of your heart oh, prince, for you are always interested in your own wife... 
[3-9-5, 6]

Shlok 7: "You are conscientious, adherent of truth, and obliging father's orders, and in you virtue and truth, 
nay everything is established in you... [3-9-7]

Shlok 8: "Oh, dextrous one, all this can possibly be shouldered by one with controlled senses, and oh, graceful 
one for a gaze, I am also aware of your sense control... [3-9-8]

[Commentary] The compound mahaabaahoshakyam is also cleaved as mahaa baaho a + shakyam, meaning 
that 'your attributes are impossible to be known even by the self-controlled sages, but they are known 
to me...' so says Seetha.

Shlok 9: "That third tendency to torture others' lives without enmity, that which will usually be effectuated 
unwarily, has now suddenly chanced before you... [3-9-9]

Shlok 10: "Intending to safeguard the sages you have promised the dwellers in Dandaka forest, oh, valiant one, 
that you would eliminate demons in a fight... [3-9-10]

Shlok 11: "Only in this respect you have started towards the well-known Dandaka forest along with your brother, 
and wielding bow and arrows...[3-9-11]

Shlok 12: "Then on seeing your starting my mind is apprehensively upset, on verily reflecting about your bearing 
there appears to be no beneficial good for you... [3-9-12]

[Commentary] This last compound of second foot where nisH shreyasam hitam is available in Gorakhpur version. 
In Eastern version it is bhaven niHshreyasam hi tat and in other older scripts it is:
tvaam caiva prasthitam dR^iShTvaa raama cintaaluma 
manaH| sarvataH cintayantyaa me tava niHshreyasam nR^ipa|| Dharmaakuutam puts this wording as:
niHshreyasam mahat. It is similar in critical editions also bhaven niHshreyasa.n hitam 
Dharmaakuutam defines this expression as, anena bhartR^iu 
hitakaariNyaa bhaaryayaa shreyo bhavatiiti suucitam|| In any way, Seetha's contemplation is, 
"you abide by your oath given to sages, and thus kill the demons. But without a cause you do not proceed 
to eliminate. If a cause for quarrel is to be there, that will be due to me. If I become the cause and 
depart you, you cannot survive without me, for you are not a polygamist. So how all these factors like 
your promise, monogamy, and eliminating demons, can be resolved by you? Thus I am thinking along with 
the associated troubles which you are going to undergo..."

Shlok 13: "Oh, brave one, your going towards Dandaka forest is not delightful to me, I tell the cause for that 
and listen to it as I tell...[3-9-13]

Shlok 14: "Indeed on entering the forest along with your brother, and wielding bow and arrows, seeing the forest 
ramblers there, won't you deplete arrows on all of them... [3-9-14]

Shlok 15: "The bow of warrior and the fuel of a burning fire if available within their reach, they immensely enhance 
their strength... [3-9-15]

Shlok 16: "Once upon a time, oh, dextrous one, there was a pious and true worded hermit in some merited forest 
that was wonted by animals and birds... [3-9-16]

Shlok 17: "Then Indra came to that hermitage handling a sword, and donning a soldier's guise, to cause hindrance 
to that hermit's ascesis... [3-9-17]

Shlok 18: "Indra gave that best sword to store, there in that hermitage to that sage who is lasting in his ascesis, 
on a redeemable basis... [3-9-18]

Shlok 9: "On receiving that sword, he who is duteous in guarding the entrustment, moved about in the forest always 
handling the sword, to safeguard the confidence reposed in him... [3-9-19]

Shlok 20: "Wherever that dedicated guardian of that entrustment goes, even to obtain tubers or fruits, he did 
not go without that sword... [3-9-20]

Shlok 21: "Carrying that sword always, that hermit slowly made his own faculty infuriated, loosing determination 
in ascesis... [3-9-21]

Shlok 22: "Then with the constant association of that weapon that sage gradually became inadvertent, and smitten 
by vice he went to hell... [3-9-22]

Shlok 23: "Thus, all this happened earlier, only owing the reason of associating with a weapon constantly, and 
the sequel of constant association with weapon is as good as constant association with fire... [3-9-23]

Shlok 24- 25: "In affinity and in respect I am reminding but not tutoring you, and in anyway improper is that thought 
of yours to wield your bow to kill the demons dwelling in Dandaka without any enmity, oh, brave one, 
undesirable is the killing of offenceless... [3-9-24, 25]

Shlok 26: "For the valiant Kshatriya-s who are inclined in forests heartily, the purpose of the bow is this much 
'safeguarding the sufferers...' [3-9-26]

[Commentary] There are some conflicting reviews on this stanza. It is said in the first foot vaneSu niyata aatmaanaam 
But older mms contain sva dharmeSu nirata aatmaanaam will be found, while Dharmaakuutam and 
Eastern versions have it as vaneSu nirata only. This Gorakhpur version and critical editions 
are having as vaneSu niyata The meaning in other versions is that Kshatriya-s should delight 
in their class-oriented righteousness, even when in forests. Thus Seetha's thinking is that they should 
live like hermits in forests, without resorting to the warring attributes of Kshatriya class. In the 
second foot she says that the function of bow is limited to 'safeguard the suffering lot...' In the 
next chapter at 3-10-3, Rama retorts with the same expression in answering Seetha.

Shlok 27: "Where that weapon? Where this forest? Where the principles of Kshatriya? And where is sageness? All 
this is inconsistent... let us esteem the laws of the land... [3-9-27]

Shlok 28: "Weapon admiring mind becomes maligned with avariciousness, you may therefore follow the tenet of Kshatriya-s 
on going to Ayodhya again... [3-9-28]

Shlok 29: "Everlasting satisfaction will be there to my father-in-law and mothers-in-laws, on your becoming a 
devout sage even after forfeiture of kingdom... [3-9-29]

Shlok 30: "From virtuousness prosperity emanates, from righteousness happiness, and by honourableness all are 
achieved, and this universe is the essence of probity... [3-9-30]

Shlok 31: "Experts will make efforts to exhaust their own selves with those and those principles, thus they realise 
sublimity... unachievable is pleasure by pleasuring alone... [3-9-31]

Shlok 32: "Always tread along the righteousness with a pure mind, oh, gentle one, and specially in these sagely 
forests... you know everything in all the three worlds, in all its nuances... [3-9-32]

Shlok 33: "I cite all this with my womanly waver, and who is capable to talk to you about dharma? Ponder mindfully 
along with your brother, and what that is appropriate, you do it...but not belatedly... [3-9-33]



This particular chapter is an interesting juncture in Ramayana, 
where Seetha reminds about the question of triggering cause for Rama's waging a war against demons. 
Seetha's doubt is well explained in Dharmaakuutam, the encyclopaedic commentary on Ramayana. A number 
of pages are allotted there for this chapter, and it is said there, that if Seetha is said to be self-contradictory 
in telling Rama that bow and arrows are a must to Kshatriya-s to protect the helpless when saying 'safeguard 
the sufferers, then only Kshatriya-s should use their bow..." as at verse 3-9-26 above, and also questioning 
immediately at 3-9-27, 'where the Kshatriya dharma, where the hermit's way of living...' etc., dharmaakuutam 
says not so. She is not contradicting herself in her statements, but asking Rama to have a cause, without 
resorting to weaponry against those demons, in a straightforward way.
ataH tad rakShaNaaya aayudhamna graahyam iti etad 
abhipraayakatvaat ||



She is inquisitive to know 
why Rama alone shall raise the bow and arrows against some demons hurting some sages. These sages are 
having super powers and Indra like celestial chiefs are coming to these sages to take them to heaven 
with their mortal bodies. Can't they eliminate these demons? But these super hermits are not going to 
heaven, which is the minimum ambition of any penance, but requesting Rama to protect them from demons. 
And Rama obligingly started to wage this unilateral war, where any war requires a triggering point. 
Can't the super sages eliminate these demons, with their powers acquired by their penances? This is 
the question of Seetha. For this, Rama replies so convincingly in the next chapter, saying that the 
sages cannot issue forth a curse at the demons, in the course of their penance.



Sage Vishvamitra, though 
being a furious sage, once sought the help of Rama to counter the Demoness Tataka. And Rama rendered 
it. Now also these sages do not waste their powers at the mischievous demons, but ask Rama to safeguard 
their interests, for Rama is the king, whether he may be in capital or in forests.



Secondly, Rama is subjected 
to the throne of Ayodhya, now being held by his brother Bharata, and as a loyalist to that throne, Ram 
should act in accordance with the rules of his kingdom. This area Dandaka forests is under the ambit 
of their own kingdom. So Rama has to perform the deeds suitable to their kingdom. When killing Vali, 
Rama speaks to Vali -- "all this area is under our kingdom, now held by Bharata, and it is my duty 
to act in accordance with the decree of that throne..."



"Regarding the cause, Seetha's 
doubt comes true and she alone becomes the ultimate cause for Rama, to wage the final war with Ravana.



SARGA 10
------------------------------

[Text] Rama replies Seetha's enquiry as to why he should wage war to eliminate the demons. He says 
			that it is only to protect the land from the atrocities of demons, and for safeguarding 
			the decrepit sages under his scheme of protecting the helpless.

Shlok 1: On hearing all of the words said by Vaidehi, in adoration of her husband, he who abides by virtue alone 
that Rama replied Janaki. [4-10-1]

Shlok 2: "You have said beneficial, friendlily words that are seemlier to your disposition, oh, lady, which 
are apt to speak of your familial brought up, for you are the daughter of virtue-knowing Janaka. [4-10-2]

Shlok 3: "What more shall I say, oh, lady, since it is said that 'a warrior handles a bow so that misery's tears 
cease to flow...' and this saying is iterated even by you... [4-10-3]

Shlok 4: "Oh! Seetha, those shleterable sages of Dandaka forest have approached me sombrely on their own, and 
thus they came into my refuge... [4-10-4]

Shlok 5: "Subsisting on fruits and tubers, living at all the time in forests those sages are not getting quietude, 
as they are scared by the demons with invidious deeds... [4-10-5]

Shlok 6- 7a: "The sages dwelling in Dandaka forest are being eaten away by fiendish demons that subsist on human 
flesh, and while being eaten away like that those eminent Brahmans have said to me, "please come to 
our rescue..." [4-10-6,7a]

Shlok 7b- 8- 9a: "This way when I have heard the words voiced by them, I comforted them verbally and avouched this way, 
"Be gracious to me... you all... by which reason I am being addressed this way by this kind of eminent 
Brahmans, whom I should have actually addressed my self, this indeed is a dishonour for me... [4-10-7b, 
8, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: "Then I said before the Brahmans, "what shall I do?" All of them thus thronged and spoke this word. 
[4-10-9b, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: "Many of the guise changing demons are outrightly torturing us in Dandaka forest, hence in that context 
you shall protect us... [4-10-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 12a: "Those resistless carnivorous demons, oh, merited Rama, will descend exactly at the time of fire oblations, 
or on propitious times like full or new moons to persecute us... [4-10-11b, 12a]

Shlok 12b- 13a: "We the ascetics being assaulted thus are aggrieved, and when we searched for a recourse you chanced 
as our ultimate course... [4-10-12b, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: "We by the efficacy of our ascesis are surely capable to eradicate those demons, but we do not wish 
to shorten the effect of our long earned merit of ascesis... [4-10-13b, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: "Many hurdles are always there in our practice of ascesis, and even the ascesis have become impracticable, 
oh, Raghava, thus though being eaten away by the demons we are not issuing any curse... [4-10-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16b: "Thereby, you along with your brother protect us that are being persecuted by the demons dwelling in 
Dandaka forest as you alone are the protector of ours in these forests...'so said sages to me... [4-10-15b, 
16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: "On hearing all those words, oh, Seetha, I promised complete protection to the sages of Dandaka forests... 
[4-10-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18a: "Having promised to the sages it is incapable of me to implement it otherwise while I am alive... truth 
is dearer to me, isn't it... [4-10-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: "I may forfeit my life, forgo Lakshmana, or even forsake you but not a promise, that too especially 
made to Brahmans, and having promised I can never go back... [4-10-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: "By that reason, oh, Seetha, even if I am unasked, safeguarding sages is definitely to be done by me, 
how then it is undone when given a promise... [4-10-19b, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: "With your friendship and good-heartedness you say these words, oh, Seetha, I am contended... uninterested 
ones do not forewarn, indeed... [4-10-20b, 21a]

Shlok 21b: "Appropriate and seemly is your word of caution to your bloodline, oh, graceful Seetha, you are the 
co-pursuer in dharma with me, hence you are loftier to me than my own lives..." So said Rama to Seetha. 
[4-10-21b, c]

Shlok 22: That exalted soul Rama on saying those words to Seetha, his dear wife and the daughter of Janaka, wielding 
his bow proceeded further with Lakshmana to the picturesque woodlands of hermits. [4-10-22]



SARGA 11
------------------------------

[Text] Rama comes across lake from which divine music is heard. Surprised at the musical notes 
			from beneath the waters of the lake he enquires with the sage who is following, and that 
			sage narrates the episode of Sage Mandakarni. Then Rama proceeds on wondering at that lake, 
			and he visits all the hermitages about there and thus elapsed are ten years. Again Rama 
			returns to the hermitage of Sage Suteekhsna, and after staying there for some time, takes 
			leave of that sage and proceeds to see Sage Agastya. And on the way he visits the brother 
			of Sage Agastya also. Rama, on the way narrates about the great deeds done by Sage Agastya 
			in protecting humans from demons, and also depicts the propitious nature of Agastya's hermitage.

Shlok 1: Rama travelled ahead while the glorious Seetha in middle, and wielding bow Lakshmana followed them on 
the rear. [4-11-1]

[Commentary] This verse is commented specially by the ancient narrators. It is said that Om, praNava is 
reflected in this verse. The Om is the compound of three letters a + u + ma, and the first 
letter in the verse is a , in a + grataH. The second letter of Om, i.e.,
u is u in su sobhanaa. Other versions may read this as su madhyamaa 
, even then this u is there. The letter before last word ha is ma , as in
jagaa ma . These three letters put together are Om. So the three, Rama, Lakshmana, Seetha are 
compared with these three letters of Om.

[Commentary] Vishnu/Rama is in letter a and he is coursing ahead, agrartaH prayayau , followed by u, Lakshmi/Seetha, 
who is an embodiment of the Absolute's karuNa , benevolence, as said at lakshmyaa kaaruNya 
ruupayaa And she is the illusory aspect of that Absolute, Maya, yaamaa ye mï¿½ , and being 
so, she will be the veil in between that Absolute and Innate Soul. The last letter ma is
makaaro jiiva vaacaka, makaaro daasa vaacaka, is the sign for the servitude of the Innate Soul 
to the Absolute. That is what Lakshmana is.

[Commentary] And anu jagaama means that which follows without any I-ness or Mine-ness as a total surrender,
kainkarya . This agrataH prayayau raamaH is said to be the leadership quality of Soul, 
or Rama, where he does it himself without preaching, like Krishna. Previously when they entered forests, 
Lakshmana was leading and showing the way, as a dutiful servant. During next phase all three walked 
in line. Now, Rama wanted to wage war with demons, thus he leads the way, keeping Seetha in centre, 
followed and guarded by Lakshmana. This is the view point of the sages following them, for they the 
sages always meditate about that Absolute, in terms of Om, and these three appeared as the 
three letters of Om.

Shlok 2: They proceeded while seeing diverse mountain terraces, forests, and diversely enchanting rivers too, 
along with Seetha. [4-11-2]

Shlok 3: Beholding the rivers that have water-birds like saarasa, chakravaaka that move on their sandbanks, and 
also the lakes that contain lotuses and water born birds, they moved on. [4-11-3]

Shlok 4: The moved on watching spotted deer banded in herds, the wild boars, large horned buffaloes maddened 
in virility, and the ruttish elephants rending trees like their enemies. [4-11-4]

Shlok 5: On going far on their way, and when the sun is dangling in the western skiy, together they saw a charming 
lake of one yojana width fully overloaded with red and white lotuses, overspread with sporting elephants, 
and over-flurried with waterfowls like saarasa birds, kaadamba birds, swans and with others kinds too. 
[4-11-5, 6]

Shlok 7: Out of the tranquil and enchanting waters of that lake audible are the melodies of singing and musical 
instruments, but none is visible. [4-11-7]

Shlok 8: Then Rama and also Lakshmana, the great charioteer, inquisitively started to ask the Sage named Dharmabhrita 
about it. [4-11-8]

Shlok 9: "On hearing this greatly amazing music from lake, oh, great saint, intensive inquisitiveness is created 
in all of us, why this, please tell us clearly about it." Thus Rama asked. [4-11-9]

Shlok 10: Thus said by that Raghava then that virtuous sage quickly started to tell about the efficacy of that 
lake. [4-11-10]

Shlok 11: "Oh, Rama, this is an all-time lake built by the ascetic power of the sage Mandakarni, known as Five 
Apsara Lake. [4-11-11]

Shlok 12: "He that great saint Mandakarni practiced rigorous ascesis for ten thousand years staying in the waters 
of the lake, and consuming air alone. [4-11-12]

Shlok 13: "Then all the gods are worried and met together with Fire-god at the helm of affairs, and they all conversed 
among themselves. [4-11-13]

Shlok 14: "This sage is praying for someone's place among us," thus all of those heaven-dwellers are perturbed 
at heart. [4-11-14]

Shlok 15: "Then all gods assigned five important Apsara-s, the celestial courtesans, whose shine is like the sprint 
of the lightning, to effectuate hindrance in that sage's ascesis. [4-11-15]

Shlok 16: Then those five celestial beauties have led that sage astray who discerned the nature of this and the 
other world, or good and bad, or the nature of Absolute-Soul and Body- bound Soul, towards the passional 
restraint by, as though to achieve god's task.

Shlok 17: "Also thus, those five celestial apsara-s attained wifehood of that sage, and for them he built a house 
in there, concealed inside that lake. [4-11-17]

Shlok 18: "While those five celestial apsara-s are living in there, they are gratifying that sage according to 
his delight as youthfulness came upon that sage owing to his power of asceticism. [4-11-18]

Shlok 19: "These musical sounds we hear are emerging out as played on their instruments, mingled with the tinkling 
of their ornaments, and mixed with their delightful singing of melodies." So said sage Dharmabhrita 
to Rama. [4-11-19]

Shlok 20: That highly renowned Raghava together with his brother acknowledged the sage Dharmabhrita's account, 
exclaiming it as "amazing is this..." [4-11-20]

Shlok 21- 22a: While saying thus Raghava has seen a cluster of hermitages nearby, encircled with sacred grass, jute 
cloths, and even encompassed with Vedic solemness, and he entered that hermitage along with Seetha and 
Lakshmana. [4-11-21, 22a]

Shlok 22b- 23- 24a: Rama happily stayed in that august cluster of hermitages duly venerated by those great saints for sometime, 
and then that expert in great missiles Rama went to the hermitages of those sages with whom he stayed 
earlier, for another round. [4-11-22, 23, 24a]

Shlok 24b- 25- 26a: Rama stayed there for nearly ten months at some place, elsewhere for one year, at somewhere else for 
four months, and for five, and six months at elsewhere, even at somewhere else for more than a month, 
and for more than one and half months elsewhere. [4-11-24, 25, 26a]

Shlok 26b- 27a: While Raghava stayed comfortably taking delight in those hermitages of sages, indeed ten years have 
smoothly elapsed. [4-11-26b, 27a]

[Commentary] As per the above the counof monthst comes to sixty months, i.e., five years. But it is said that ten 
years are elapsed comfortably. There are a good number of arguments counting the months said above and 
the point of ten years, said finally. Dharmaakuutam puts it as ten years only: tataH paryaayeNa 
nikhila muni jana nilayeShu niitvaa dasha samvatsaraan punaraagamya tiikShNatapasaH sutiikShNam|| 
Thus ten full years are spent only in around these hermitages, peregrinating from one to the other. 
The total period of exile is fourteen years. Here it is said that ten years are completed. In Chitrakuta 
two years are spent. Then the search for Seetha and final war should happen in two year span.

Shlok 27b- 28a: Thus that virtue-knowing glorious Rama on going around those hermitages along with Seetha indeed went 
to the hermitage of Sage Suteekshna again. [4-11-27b, 28a]

Shlok 28b- 29a: On coming at that hermitage that enemy destroyer is adored by sages, and he resided there for some time. 
[4-11-28b, 29a]

Shlok 29b- 30a: Then on one day while staying in that hermitage Rama submissively said this to that sage Suteekshna 
who is sitting nearby. [4-11-29b, 30a]

Shlok 30b- 31a: "I have always heard through the narratives narrated by other sages that the godly and eminent sage 
Agastya is residing in this forest. [4-11-30b, 31a]

Shlok 31b- 32a: "But due to the vastness of this forest I have not known that place, where is the pious hermitage of 
that astute sage? [4-11-31b, 32a]

Shlok 32b- 33a: "I wish to approach that sage seeking that godly sage's graciousness, along with my brother and Seetha 
to venerate him. [4-11-32b, 33a]

Shlok 33b- 34a: "Can I personally propitiate that supreme sage -- is my high ambition, and it is recurrent in my heart." 
So said Rama to Suteekshna. [4-11-33b, 34a]

Shlok 34b- 35a: Sage Suteekshna on hearing that particular request of that virtue-minded Rama is gladdened and said 
this to him. [4-11-34b, 35a]

Shlok 35b- 36b: "Oh, Raghava, even I wished to say this to you, that you may approach Agastya along with Lakshmana and 
Seetha. [4-1-35b, 36a]

Shlok 36b- 37a: "But providentially you alone raised this topic with me, Rama, I will tell you where that great sage 
Agastya is. [4-11-36b, 37a]

Shlok 37b: "On your going four yojana-s from this hermitage, oh, dear Rama, there is the great and glorious hermitage 
of Agastya's brother on the southern side. [4-11-37b, c]

Shlok 38: "That hermitage is there on a plateau in a spectacular place of that forest which is adorned with many 
flowers and fruits, thickets of long pepper, and reechoed with the callings of various birds. [4-11-38]

Shlok 39- 40a: "There are diverse lakes that are receptacles for tranquil waters, that are teeming with swans and partridges, 
beautified with ruddy geese, and Rama staying there for a night you may proceed in the next morning. 
[4-11-39, 40a]

Shlok 40b- 41a: "On going one yojana beyond, taking the southward course on the side of the forest clump you will find 
Agastya's hermitage. [4-11-40b, 41a]

Shlok 41b- 42: "Seetha and Lakshmana will enjoy those woodlands adorned with diverse pleasant trees, as the woodlands 
abounding with diverse trees will naturally be delightful, isn't it. [4-11-41b, 42]

Shlok 43: "If your mind is made up to see that great sage Agastya, oh, great ingenious Rama, resolve your thinking 
in going only today." So said Sage Suteekshna to Rama. [4-11-43]

Shlok 44: On listening that which is said by the sage, Rama revered that sage along with his brother, and then 
he journeyed with Seetha and his follower Lakshmana aiming to reach Agastya. [4-11-44]

Shlok 45- 46: While viewing beautiful forests, cloud-like mountains, lakes, and rivers that are flowing following 
the pathways, Rama happily journeyed on the pathway indicated by sage Suteekshna, then he gladly spoke 
this sentence to Lakshmana. [4-11-45, 46]

Shlok 47: "Definitely this alone appears to be the hermitage of Sage Agastya's brother, one with great soul and 
pious deeds. [4-11-47]

Shlok 48: "As how thousands of trees are bowing under the weight of flowers and fruit on the pathway, thereby 
I perceive it to be the hermitage of Agastya's bother. [4-11-48]

Shlok 49: "Upraised by the wind the sour-smell of pippali fruits is suddenly coming closer from the forest. [4-11-49]

Shlok 50: "Here and there visible are the well heaped heaps of firewood, and all over appearing is the sacred 
grass snipped at its top and gemlike in its tinge. [4-11-50]

Shlok 51: "From inside the hermitage in the midst of this forest the vertex of smoke from ritual fire is clearly 
visible as high as the vertex of a black rainy cloud. [4-11-51]

Shlok 52: "On performing bathing in sacred streams the Brahmans are making flower offerings to gods, called
puSpa bali, with the flowers that are personally collected by them. [4-11-52]

[Commentary] If flowers for worship are taken from someone else, half of the merit of that worship goes to the one 
who gave those flowers. Hence the flowers are to be plucked by the worshipper alone, that too from his 
flower garden. They are not to be stolen, begged, carried in palms, or in upper cloth, but to be carried 
in a big size leaf.

[Commentary] "Best are the flowers brought personally, medium is the forest-born, purchased are the worse, and those 
that are brought by others, the worst."

Shlok 53: "Thus by the words of Sage Suteekshna as I have heard, oh, gentle Lakshmana, this hermitage shall definitely 
be that of Sage Agastya's brother. [4-11-53]

Shlok 54: "Whose brother is Sage Agastya with meritorious deeds, who wishing well-being of the world controlled 
death by his efficacy, and who made this southern region a liveable region, this must be the hermitage 
of such a sage, such Agatya's brother. [4-11-54]

Shlok 55: "Once upon a time verily cruel demon brothers Vaataapi and Ilvala were here together, and they the dreadful 
demons, they say, used to be Bhraman-killers. [4-11-55]

Shlok 56: "Disguising in Bhraman's semblance and speaking sophisticatedly that Ilvala used to invite Brahmans 
for the purpose of obsequial ceremonies, where Brahman are fed after usual ceremony to appeases their 
manes. [4-11-56]

[Commentary] Here the word sam skR^ita is another point for discussion for commentators saying that the 
demon Ilvala used to speak in chaste Sanskrit. This is one version. The other is as above speaking sophisticatedly. 
But as could be seen all the raakshasa-s are Vedic pundits and thus there is no oddity in their speaking 
chaste Sanskrit. Hence their luring or sophisticated talk to entice Brahmans is taken valid. The following 
verse also has the same word, meaning refinement.

Shlok 57: Then Ilvala used to make his brother Vaataapi into a ram, perfect that ram's meat into deliciously cooked 
food, and used to feed Brahmans according to obsequial rites and deeds. [4-11-57]

Shlok 58: "When those Brahmans are surfeited with that ram's meat, then Ilvala used to shout loudly, "oh, Vaataapi, 
you may come out." [4-11-58]

Shlok 59: "Then on listening his brother's words Vaataapi used to lunge out bleating like a ram, tearing and rending 
the bodies of those Brahmans. [4-11-59]

Shlok 60: "This way they the guise changing demons always ruined thousands of Brahmans together, greedy for raw-flesh 
as they are. [4-11-60]

[Commentary] Some say that the wording taiH they, is plural ad it is not accommodative, and some ancient 
text of unknown reference contained these words, taabhyaam evam paramtapa pishita ashayaa by 
them two, that way, Lakshmana, for pishita aashayaa raw meat, avaricious as they are, they 
used to kill.

Shlok 61: "Then by Sage Agastya, whom gods have prayed to end this demonic menace, and whom demon Ilvala invited 
to feast during obsequial rites, he that Agastya having relished the fiendish demon in the form of ram, 
they say, had finished him off. [4-11-61]

Shlok 62: "Then Ilvala while giving lateral hand wash into the palms of Agastya entered in the routine conversation 
of obsequies asking, "Is this rite fulfilled..." and he furthered it in calling his brother to come 
out. [4-11-62]

Shlok 63: Then that wise and eminent sage Agastya spoke mockingly to Ilvala who is conversing that way to his 
brother to come out. [4-11-63]

Shlok 64: "Where is the energy for that ram shaped demon brother of yours to come out as I digested and sent him 
to the hellish residence of Terminator. [4-11-64]

[Commentary] This saying of Agastya has remained as an epigram till date. That demon Ilvala called out, "Vaataapi..." 
for which Agastya replied jiirNam 'digested...' and after repeating this exchange for some 
time, these questions and answers are combined to form this sentence: jiirNam jiirNam vaataapi jiirNam 
meaning that 'Vaataapi is digested...' In traditional upbringing, mothers used to say after feeding 
babies with milk or other nourishments, giving a mild exercise, jiirNam jiirNam Vaataapi jiirNam 
for many times. It means that mothers wished their babies should digest any indigestible or food ruinous 
to health, as has been digested by Sage Agastya. It is said Agastya prohibited any kind of meat to Brahmans, 
as meat food will be shearing their stomachs with it ram's horns from then on. He is also said to have 
cursed Brahmans to be diverse, braahmaNaanaam anekatvam as none will concur with the other.

Shlok 65: "Then on hearing the words of sage Agastya affirming brother's demise, that night-walking demon furiously 
commenced to assault the sage. [4-11-65]

Shlok 66: "When that demon rushed towards that best Bhraman to kill, he that sage glowing with his own refulgence 
burnt him down just by his flame-like eyes and doomed him to death. [4-11-66]

Shlok 67: "This hermitage embellishing with lake and woods belongs to the brother of Sage Agastya who has done 
this impossible deed just by his compassion towards Brahmans." So said Rama to Lakshmana and Seetha 
about Agastya. [4-11-67]

Shlok 68: While Rama narrated that way to Lakshmana sun went into dusk and the vesperal time came close of him. 
[4-11-68]

Shlok 69: Worshipping sunset along with brother as per custom, Rama entered that hermitage and greeted that sage. 
[4-11-69]

Shlok 70: Raghava spent one night there when that sage received him well and when they dined on tubers and fruits. 
[4-11-70]

Shlok 71: Raghava spent that night there and when sun rose in solar orbit he took leave of the brother of Sage 
Agastya saying the following. [4-11-71]

Shlok 72: "Oh, godly sage, we stayed in the night comfortably, I now make an obeisance and bid farewell to you, 
as I wish to proceed to see your mentor and elder brother Agastya. [4-11-72]

Shlok 73: When the brother of Agastya said, "you may go," Rama the legatee of Raghu journeyed on the pathways 
as directed by Suteekshna, and on observing those woodlands. [4-11-73]

[Commentary] The name of this brother of Agastya is Sudarshana. But none calls him by that name and he is just called
agastya bhraata , Agastya's brother.

Shlok 74: On observing the wild grass that grows on its own giving wild grain, Jack-fruit trees, sala trees, Ashoka 
trees, lemons trees, saplings of bilva trees and also madhuka and bilva trees he journeyed. [4-11-74]

Shlok 75- 76: Rama has seen hundreds of flowered forest trees that are battered by the trunks of elephants, that are 
adorned with monkeys, reverberated by hundreds of lusty bird folks, and that are enriched by the flowered 
climbers whorled around them. [4-11-75, 76]

Shlok 77: Then the lotus-eyed Rama said this to his follower Lakshmana who is a valiant and glory-enriching one 
and who is near at hand. [4-11-77]

Shlok 78: "As to how the trees are appearing with velvety leaves, and as to how the animals and birds appear unwearied, 
thus gauging by this it appears that the hermitage of that contemplative soul Agastya is situated not 
very far from here. [4-11-78]

Shlok 79: "He who by his own deed is renowned in the world as Agastya, the stopper of mountain, it appears to 
be his hermitage that alleviates the weary of wearied ones. [4-11-79]

[Commentary] The name Agastya is cleavable like aga+ stha mountain, who stayed, stopped from excessive growth.

Shlok 80: "The forest nearby this hermitage is overrun by huge smoke from altars of fire, overstuffed with the 
garlands of jute cloth, overcrowded with the herds of peaceful deer, and also overloaded with sonority 
of the birds. [4-11-80]

Shlok 81: "He who impeding death by his yogic might and wishing well-being for worlds made this southern extent 
a liveable province by his pious deeds, his hermitage is this. [4-11-81]

[Commentary] There is some problem in copying. These stanzas of verse have already appeared above at 4-11-54.

Shlok 82: "Under whose influence the demons behold this southern quarter appallingly, and they do not even venture 
to live here, such a sage Agastya's hermitage is this. [4-11-82]

Shlok 83: "And from when that pious deeded Agastya took possession of this quarter, from then on the night walkers 
are calmed down and remained without feud. [4-11-83]

Shlok 84: "This very worthy southern quarter is known in the name of that godly saint Agastya and this remained 
unattackable to the demons with cruel deeds. [4-11-84]

Shlok 85: "Complying which sage's directive Mt. Vindhya ceased to heighten in order not to obstruct the path of 
the sun, such sage's hermitage is this who is renowned in the world by his deeds and whose longevity 
is inestimable, hence this glorious hermitage is adored by well-behaved animals and humans as well. 
[4-11-85, 86]

[Commentary] The name Agastya is derived from a famous act of this Sage. Mt. Meru is the highest peak on earth. By 
its nature it grows day by day, and stands first to be saluted by the rising sun in east every day. 
Jealous of this Mt. Meru, Mt. Vindhya started to rise to exceed the height of Mt. Meru, thus obstructing 
the sun's path. Then the day changed for night and the travel of Sun and Moon, the performance of Vedic 
rituals, which are bound by the solar lunar movement, went topsy-turvy. Then the gods prayed Agastya 
to do something to decrease the height of Mt. Meru. Agastya and his wife then were coming to Mt. Vindhya 
and seeing its height, he requested Mt. Vindhya, "Oh, Mountain King Vindhya, myself and my wife are 
going southward, and we are not able to climb this much height... kindly lower yourself, so that we 
old people climb you and go to the other side..." Mt. Vindhya being an ardent worshipper of sages and 
saints immediately lowered his height to the ground level, so that the old couple need not climb but 
just walk over him. Agastya and his wife on coming to the southern side of the mountain again requested 
Mt. Vindhya to be at this height only, for they will be returning soon to north. Mt. Vindhya readily 
agreed for that also, and it is lying like that even today. Because Agastya did not return to north 
on coming to south Mt. Vindhya is still believed to be at ground level. Thus the solar and lunar movement, 
seasons' revolve, Vedic calendars etc. are again put to normalcy. Thus the name Agastya, aga stha 
mountain, stopper, agam sthaasyati or, stabhnaati iti agastyaH. He played an important 
role in uplifting southern regions of India, namely Dravidian cultures. Hid wife is Lopaamudra, the 
saintly lady will be quoted in Lalitha Sahasra Naamaavali. The thousand name of Mother Universe.

Shlok 87: "He that gentle sage who is always interested in the respect of sagacious ones is thus an esteemed one 
in the world, and for us when we approach him he accords beneficence. [4-11-87]

Shlok 88: "Oh, adept Lakshmana, I wish to worship that great saint Agastya therein that hermitage, and oh, gentle 
one, I think of living the remainder of forest living here only. [4-11-88]

Shlok 89: "There gods with gandharva-s, siddha-s, exalted sages will be worshipping Agastya who is self-regulating 
self-disciplinary. [4-11-89]

Shlok 90: "There no liar can live, nor a savage, nor even a deceiver, nor a man-torturer, nor one with sinful 
behaviour, for that sage is of that nature. [4-11-90]

Shlok 91: "There the gods, celestials, reptiles, birds live together wishing to worship the Absolute with self-discipline. 
[4-11-91]

Shlok 92: "There the blest and great souls of accomplished ascesis rode to heavens by aircrafts similar to sun 
in resplendence, on relinquishing their mortal bodies here and on obtaining new bodies. [4-11-92]

Shlok 93: "There gods will endow the state of celestials or immortals, or many realms of divine living to those 
auspicious beings that worship them. [4-11-93]

Shlok 94: "We arrived at the threshold of the hermitage, oh, Soumitri, you enter firstly and submit to Sage Agastya 
about my arrival at this place along with Seetha. [4-11-94]

[Commentary] This is an important point of Rama's speaking to Lakshmana for a protocol to enter the hermitage. Earlier 
all the three used to enter together, releasing bowstrings and in all their submissiveness. But here 
Rama wants to follow an imperial protocol to announce his arrival there. Rama is said to have asked 
Lakshmana to inform the sage that karta subject to eliminate -  himself; and the object, or 
the instrument to eliminate Ravana, namely Seetha have come. Rama says in above verses that he would 
like to spend rest of the exile here in this hermitage. But Sage Agastya later asks him to proceed to 
Panchavati, i.e., towards the dominions of demons. For that and for keeping the sage informed about 
the arrival of time to eradicate Ravana, Rama seeks this protocol.



SARGA 12
------------------------------

[Text] Rama, Lakshmana, and Seetha enter the hermitage of Sage Agastya. Sage Agastya is also waiting 
			to receive Rama for along time, and now receives them with all honours, sagaciously perceiving 
			Rama as Vishnu incarnate. Sage Agastya gives a divine bow of Vishnu, two quivers with ever 
			replenishing with arrows, and a golden sword in a golden sheath to Rama, saying that with 
			the very same armoury Vishnu once eradicated evil on earth.

Shlok 1: On entering the hermitage Lakshmana, the younger brother of Raghava, reached Agastya's disciple and 
spoke this sentence to him. [3-12-1]

Shlok 2: "A king named Dasharatha was there, his eldest son and the dynamic one, Rama has arrived along with 
his wife Seetha to see the sage. [3-12-2]

Shlok 3: "I am his loyal, dedicated, and adherent younger brother named Lakshmana, if ever you have heard of 
us. [3-12-3]

Shlok 4: "Such as we are, we entered the awful forest at the decree of our father, and we wiush to see the godly 
sage, let this be informed to him." Said Lakshmana to the disciple of Agastya. [3-12-4]

Shlok 5: On hearing that sentence of Lakshmana that disciple who is ascetically rich replied 'agreed, ' and he 
entered the sanctum of Ritual-fire to submit the same to Agastya. [3-12-5]

[Commentary] This sanctum where the Altar of Fire is established will be well deep inside these hermitages. One arrives 
at the Altar of Fire after passing through many places designated to particular deities, where fire 
oblations are conducted. These places of worship occurring before the hall of homa are listed in the 
coming verses.

Shlok 6- 7a: He that agreeable disciple of sage quickly approached the irrefutable sage by his asceticism, made palm-fold 
and said this to the eminent sage about about the arrival of Rama, exactly as said by Lakshmana. [3-12-6, 
7a]

Shlok 7b- 8a: "Sons of King Dasharatha, Rama and also thus Lakshmana have entered the threshold of hermitage along 
with the wife of Rama, namely Seetha. [3-12-7b, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: "Those two enemy-destroyers have come cherishing to see and serve you, hence it will be apt of you to 
order what next is to be done in this regard." Said disciple to the sage. [3-12-8b, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: Having heard from the disciple that Rama has arrived with Lakshmana and with highly fortunate Seetha 
the sage said this to him. [3-12-9b, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: "My heart is indeed yearning for his arrival, and after this long a time Rama providentially came to 
see me." [3-12-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 12a: "Go forth and make welcome to Rama, Lakshmana and to Seetha, and they be entered here, why you have 
not invited them as yet? [3-12-11b, 12a]

[Commentary] Agastya is waiting for long to receive Rama to handover a great bow, quivers and sword. Agastya himself 
an eliminator of demons and Rama's mission is also the same. Therefore, on hearing that "Rama arrived 
" his ears are said to have received an ear-pleasing experience, karNa aananda anubhava. Maheshvara 
Tirtha.

Shlok 12b- 13a: Thus said by the great-souled sage and the knower of virtue, the disciple adored him with palm-fold 
saying that "as you say." [3-12-12b, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: Then that disciple went out with a little perplexity and said this to Lakshmana, "Where is this Rama? 
He may come to see the sage and let him enter hermitage on his own." Said that disciple to Lakshmana. 
[3-12-13b, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: Then on going out to the exterior of that hermitage along with that disciple, Lakshmana has shown him 
Rama and Janaka's daughter Seetha. [3-12-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: While that disciple repeated the obliging words of Agastya entered that reception-worthy Rama into hermitage 
on receiving him well. [3-12-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: And then Rama entered the hermitage with Seetha and Lakshmana looking over it which is overspread with 
docile deer. [ 3-12-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18- 19- 20- 21a: Rama entered inside the hermitage and saw therein the sanctus of Brahma, Fire-god, Vishnu, Indra, Vivasvat 
- the Sun-god, Soma - the Moon-god, Bhaga - one among the twelve Suns, and the sanctusms of Kubera, 
[Wealth-Management-god, are seen and passed by the three of them, sanctums of Dhaata, Vidhaata - Vedic 
deities created by Brahma to help Svayambhuu Manu, santucm of Vaayu - the Air-god, and also like that 
the sanctum of great-soloed VaruNa - the Rain-god who also wields noose, and the sanctum of Gayatri 
- the presiding deity of gnosis, sanctum of Vasus - eight of them, and the sanctum of cobra's king - 
aadi sheSa, the divine Thousand-headed serpent that bears this globe on its head, and on which Vishnu 
reclines, and even the sanctum of GaruDa - the Divine Eagle and the vehicle of Vishnu, and the half 
brother of aadi sheSa, and the sanctum of Kaartikeya - chief of gods army, second son of Shiva, and 
the sanctum of Dharma - Dharmaraaja, presiding deity of Virtue-Vice-Time of living beings, in-charge 
of the hell. [17b, 18, 19, 20, 21a]

[Commentary] These sanctums are particular holy places in hermitages where those designated deities will be invoked 
for worship. These will be seventeen in general, as said in Vedic doctrine, yo vai sapta dasha 
- Defined by seventeen letters. On passing through all these places, the place of homa kunDa 
, Altar of Fire will come. Hence, usually none will be allowed inside the hermitages, and all are supposed 
to stay in aashrama padam , the hermitage's threshold, a porch or portico minus its roofing. 
As such Rama wanted an entry in to hermitage.

Shlok 21b- 22a: Then encircled by disciples the sage Agastya came out quickly, and Rama saw him who is glowing brilliant 
before all the other sages. [3-12-21b, 22a]

[Commentary] In the list of sanctums said above no place is said for Shiva, on which earlier commentators discussed 
much. Of them Govindaraja stated, "Shiva has no worshipfulness in Vaishnavaite way, hence his sanctum 
is unsaid: atra puujya 
daivateShu rudrasya anupaadaanaat a-puujyatvam uktam | adhunaa kaiscit puujya maanataa tu taamasa shaastra 
anurodhaneti bodhyam|| Others contradicted this, saying that when Shiva's son, Kaartikeya 
is adorable, why not his Father? Rama Tilaka states agniratra rudraH The naming of Agni, Fire-god, 
as in 17th verse itself is Rudra, namely Shiva. ShiromaNi commentary also puts in the same way ' 
tatra agni shabdena shambhuH ucyate By the nomenclature of Fire, Shiva is to be construed.

Shlok 22b- 23: On seeing the brilliantly glowing sage among those sages, he that bold Rama said this sentence to Lakshmana, 
the fortifier of fortune, "Here comes the godly sage, Lakshmana, by his eminence I comprehend him as 
a depository of all ascesis." [3-12-22b, 23]

Shlok 24: That dexterous Rama on saying about that sun-like radiant sage Agastya, he that descendent of Raghu 
fell on the feet of Agastya touching them reverentially. [3-12-24]

Shlok 25: Then he who is a delight to the on lookers that noble-hearted Rama on revering the sage along with Lakshmana 
and Seetha, the princess from Videha, stood aside with his palms adjoined. [3-12-25]

Shlok 26: Offering seat and water that sage received Rama, and even on exchanging pleasantries that sage said 
to him, "please be seated." [3-12-26]

Shlok 27: Having completed his personal worship to Fire-god, and having offered water and other formalities to 
guest, that sage gave viands to guests according to his hermitic observances. [3-12-27]

[Commentary] The hermit's observances include the ritual to Fire-god before food. In some case one has to personally 
light the fire, cook his own food to the chanting of hymns, like Agastya which is an observances called
viashva devam Even now these are observed by some Vedic Brahmans.

Shlok 28: Then that eminent and shrewd sage Agastya in righteousness took his seat at the outset, and spoke to 
prudent Rama of righteousness itself, and who by now is sitting with his palms adjoined. [3-12-28]

Shlok 29: "Worshipping the fire, giving water and worshipping the guest a hermit should receive a guest and feed 
him, and if a hermit practices contrarily, oh, Rama, he is destined to eat his own flesh like a false 
deponent in other world say, hell. [3-12-29]

[Commentary] A guest is one who enables the host to go to heavens.
iShTo 
vaa yadi vaa dveShyo muurkhaH paNDita eva vaa | sampraapte vaishvadeva ante so atithi svarga sa~NkramaH 
|| "May he be dear one or despised, stupid or scholar, one who comes at the end of 
fire worship before meals, he leads the host to heavens" - paraashara suutra. Any false deponent 
giving a false witness not only goes to hell but also is destined to eat his own flesh there. Same is 
the case with the host, who does not perform his daily chores to entertain his guest.

Shlok 30: "You are the king of all the world, the treader in the path of righteousness, great charioteer of probity, 
and you are the venerable and estimable one, and you have arrived as my dear guest. [3-12-30]

[Commentary] The other way of rendering is: raajaa sarvasya lokasya ruler, of all, three worlds, hence you 
are Vishnu; mahaa rathaH great, charioteer of mortal souls through karmic cycles, thus Narayana;
puujaniiya venerable one even in daily worship, hence Vishnu; maanyaH credible one 
by those who aspire salvation, Narayana; priya atithi much desired guest than the routine sage/mortal 
guests, hence god. Thus, it is said that Sage Agastya realised Rama as Vishnu and eulogised Rama incarnation. 
Even the daily puuja worship is conducted in a manner of treating the deity as a symbolic guest 
in the household. Here that deity himself is the real guest, i.e., Narayana.

Shlok 31: Saying thus, Agastya adored Raghava well with fruits, tubers, flowers and others according to his ardency, 
and then he said this to Rama. [3-12-31]

Shlok 32- 33a: "This sacred bow that is decorated with gold and diamonds is crafted by the divine architect Vishvakarma 
pertains to Vishnu, and these unwasteful arrows equalling sun in their blaze are the gift of Brahma. 
[3-12-32, 33a]

Shlok 33b- 34: "Also these two inexhaustible quivers packed with arrows that have the blaze of Ritual-fire, and this 
sword decorated in gold together with its sheath made up of excellent golden are once given to me by 
Indra. [3-12-33b, 34]

Shlok 35: "By this bow, oh, Rama, once Vishnu eliminated horrible demons in war and brought back radiant prosperity 
to the celestials. [3-12-35]

Shlok 36: "The bow, these two quivers, arrows, and the sword, oh, Rama, the endower of grace, receive and wield 
them to triumph over the demons as Indra would wield Thunderbolt. [3-12-36]

Shlok 37: On saying thus that great resplendent and godly sage Agastya, gave all of those best weapons to Rama, 
and again spoke to Rama [3-12-37]



SARGA 13
------------------------------

[Text] Rama requests Sage Agastya to indicate a place in the forest to make a residence
during the days of exile. Sage Agastya foresees the next course of Ramayana, and orients his
conversation around womanhood and Seetha. Then that sage informs Rama to proceed to Panchavati
where Seetha will be delightful of its surroundings.

Shlok 1: " I am delighted Rama, safe you be, oh Lakshmana, well-contended I am for you have
come to pay respects to me along with Seetha. [3-13-1]

Shlok 2: "The well-worn trail of yours on pathway is strenuousness and painful for you two,
and it is evident from the sweat above your necks, even much more for Janaka's daughter, Maithili.
[3-13-2]

[Commentary] The word utkaNTha is interpreted in two ways. One is ut kaNTha
above neck, sides of face; the other being the anxiousness to get some rest. Thus, they are either
wet with sweat or also anxious to get rest after a long trek in woods.

Shlok 3: "She is delicate and not discomforted by such distresses earlier, yet motivated by
her friendship she came to these highly detrimental forests. [3-13-3]

Shlok 4: "In which way Seetha takes delight in these forests, Rama, that you may ensure
to her, for she has done an impossible deed in following you to forests, an impossible deed for
womenfolk, in general. [3-13-4]

Shlok 5: "From the beginning of creation the nature of women is this way only, oh scion of
Raghu, they devote themselves to their men in good fortune, but they leave them off in ill fortune.
[3-13-5]

Shlok 6: "With the mercuriality of hundreds of streaks of thunderbolt and with the
incisiveness of a weapon, and with the speediness of an eagle or the gusty wind, the women are
conformable. [3-13-6]

[Commentary] The flashes of thunderbolts are famous for their mercuriality and so
capricious are the women's hearts with the speed of lightning, and razor sharp will be their
attitude to cut-off the age-old friendship, if they are ill at ease, and they sever relations with
the speediness of an eagle or a gust.

Shlok 7: "But she this wife of yours is devoid of all those stigmas, an exemplary and an
estimable lady, like Lady Arundhati. [3-13-7]

[Commentary] Lady Arundhati is the wife of Sage Vashishta, an exemplary lady in devotion to
her husband and she has become a star in the sky by virtue of that devotion. Even today in
marriages, at the close of all observances, this star in skies is shown to the bride imbuing a
sense of devotion to her bridegroom, may it be in noontime.

Shlok 8: "Where you wish to put up along with Lakshmana and with this Seetha, oh,
enemy-destroyer Rama, that province shall be glorified." So said Sage Agastya to Rama."
[3-13-8]

Shlok 9: Thus said by the sage, Raghava spoke amiable this sentence adjoining his palms to
the sage who is glowing like a ritual-fire. [3-13-9]

Shlok 10: "I am privileged and blessed as my mentor and the eminent age is well pleased with
the virtues of my brother and wife which are non-dissimilar to mine. [3-13-10]

Shlok 11: "But a place with water and many forests may please be shown, where I can reside
happily and self-composedly on erecting a hermitage." Thus Rama asked the Sage Agastya.
[3-13-11]

Shlok 12: Then that eminent sage Agastya on contemplating a while about what Rama has said,
that virtuous and confident sage spoke more ideational word to Rama. [3-13-12]

[Commentary] Rama wanted a place with 'many forests,' which is non-conditional to his exile.
Some versions contain after dharma aatmaa , and said tato vaacha vacaH subham.
This will not appear in critical or eastern recessions. For this diiraH dhiira taram vacaH
, is there. It is said, that sage Agastya contemplated for a while, and envisioning the future of
Seetha's abduction and Rama's elimination of Ravana etc by his yogic power, he said to Rama to stay
at Panchavati. This is because, he himself is courageous sage in eliminating the demons, trusting
that Rama also will do the same, he has shown a place which has many forests' around it, that too
as Rama desired.

Shlok 13: "A most prosperous place called Panchavati is there at a distance of two yojana-s
from here, oh, dear Rama, which is abundant with tubers, fruits, water, and many deer." Thus
Agastya started to tell. [3-13-13]

Shlok 14: "On your going there along with Saumitri, and on erecting a hermitage you may
take delight in there complying the decreed order of your father. [3-13-14]

Shlok 15: "Indeed all of this episode of yours is known to me, oh, merited one, by the
ability of my asceticism, and also by my friendship with Dasharatha. [3-13-15]

Shlok 16- 17a: "I am in the know of your heartfelt certitude by my ascesis, thereby I wish to
advise you to go to Panchavati, though I said that you may dwell in these ascetic-woods along with
me. [3-13-16, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18a: "That woodland will be delightful, isn't it Raghava, for it is praiseworthy and not
very far off from here, and Seetha can take delight in there. [3-13-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19: "There Maithili will take delight nearby River Godavari, and it is with abundant
tubers, fruits, various are its bird flocks, and it is very reclusive too, oh, great dextrous Rama,
further it is meritorious and appealing. [3-13-18b, 19]

Shlok 20: "Even you, Rama, with your good deportment are capable to safeguard the hermits
while residing there. [3-13-20]

Shlok 21: "Oh, brave one, you see this great forest of flower-liquor trees, you have to
proceed north of it and advance towards a banyan tree. [3-13-21]

Shlok 22: "Then on climbing up an upland a mountain is seen, that which is also not far away,
and that renowned Panchavati is there in an ever-blooming forest in the valley of that mountain."
Said Sage Agastya to Rama. [3-13-22]

Shlok 23: When thus said by Sage Agastya, Rama along with Soumitri venerated and bade farewell
to that truth advocator sage Agastya. [3-13-23]

Shlok 24: Thus well bidden by Sage Agastya those two Rama and Lakshmana have offered their
venerations at the feet of that sage and proceeded to their prospective hermitage at Panchavati
along with Seetha. [3-12-24]

Shlok 25: Those princes that are dauntless in war took up their bows and braced up their
quivers, and resolutely proceeded to Panchavati on the route apprised by that great sage Agastya.
[3-13-25]



SARGA 14
------------------------------

[Text] Rama and the other two on their way to Panchavati come into contact with Jatayu, the mighty 
			eagle. When Rama questions about its identity, Jatayu narrates the creation of animal species 
			along with humans, and informs Rama that he is a friend of King Dasharatha and would like 
			to help Rama in exile.

Shlok 1: Then while proceeding to Panchavati that Rahu's descendent came across a mammoth eagle with marvellous 
might in midway. [3-14-1]

Shlok 2: On seeing such an eagle in the forest those two highly privileged brothers Rama and Lakshmana questioned 
it asking, "Who you are?" presuming it to be a demon. [3-14-2]

Shlok 3: But that eagle with sweet ad soft words spoke to them as though to please them, "oh boy Rama know me 
as your father's friend." [3-14-3]

Shlok 4: Accepting that bird as his father's friend Raghava revered it, and he that Rama then asked for that 
eagle's name and lineage. [3-14-4]

Shlok 5: On hearing Rama's words that bird said about his ancestry and himself, and in doing so, that eagle also 
narrated the overall genesis of all beings. [3-14-5]

Shlok 6: "Once upon a time there were lords of people, oh dextrous Raghava, and you may listen all about them 
from the beginning, while I narrate [3-14-6]

Shlok 7: "Of them Kardama was there at first, and afterwards Sesha, and later Samshraya was there with many children 
and a vigorous one he was. Then Sthaanu, Mariichi, Atri, the great mighty one Kratu, Pulasthya, Angira, 
Pracheta and Pulah were there. And oh, Raghava, Daksha, Vivaswan were while the other name of Vivasvan 
is Arishtanemi, and lastly the great resplendent Kashyapa, was there as Prajapati. [3-14-9] [3-14-7]

Shlok 10: "Oh glorious Rama, there were sixty highly renowned daughters to Daksha, thus we hear. [3-14-10]

Shlok 11- 12a: "Of them Kashyapa accepted eight slender-waisted daughters of Daksha Prajapati, namely Aditi, Diti, 
Danu, Kaalakaa and Taamra, Krodhavasha, also thus Manu and even Anala also as wives. [3-14-11, 12a]

Shlok 12b- 13a: "Then Kashyapa is gladdened and said to those young wives, "You all shall deliver sons similar to me 
and who can sustain the three worlds." [3-14-12b, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: "Oh, dextrous Rama, Aditi, Diti, Kaalakaa and Danu have agreed for that, but others became unheedful 
of Kashyapa's words. [3-14-13b, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: "Aditi gave birth to twelve Aditya-s, the Sun-gods, eight Vasu-s, the Terrestrials-gods, eleven Rudraa-s, 
the Fury-gods, and two Ashvinis, the medicine-gods, total thirty-three of them. [3-14-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: "Oh, boy Rama, Diti gave birth to well-known Daitya-s, the so-called demons, and earlier this earth 
with forests and oceans belonged to them. [3-14-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: "And oh, enemy-destroyer Rama, Danu gave birth to son Ashvagriiva or also called Hayagriiva, Horse-headed 
god, and Kaalakaa gave birth to Naraka and Kaalaka. [3-14-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18a: "But Taamraa gave birth to five world renowned girls namely, Krounchi, Bhaasii, Shyenii, Dhritaraashtrii, 
and Shukii. [3-14-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19: "And from each of the five daughters of Taamraa in turn emanated are the other avian species, where 
Kraunchii gave birth to Uluuka-s, the owls, Bhasii-s gave birth to Bhaasaa-s, the vultures, and Shyenii 
gave birth to very sharp eagles and falcons, and then Dhritaraashtrii gave birth to swans and all other 
kinds of graceful water-birds. [3-14-18b, 19]

Shlok 20: "Dhritaraashtrii gave birth even to Chakravaaka water-birds, and Shukii gave birth to a daughter Nata, 
and Nata's daughter is Vinata. [3-14-20]

Shlok 21- 22: "Oh, Rama, Krodhavasha gave birth to ten of her self-same daughters namely Mrigi, Mrigamanda, Hari, 
Bhadramanda, Maatangii, Sharduulii, Shweta, Surabhii, and like that to Surasa, who is embodied with 
all giftedness, and even to Kadruva. [3-14-21, 22]

Shlok 23: "Children Mrigi are all of the the deer, oh best of the best-men, Rama, and Mrigamnda's progeny is Riksha-s, 
Bears, a kind of antelope, and like that the Himalayan yak like species.[3-14-23]

Shlok 24: "Then Bhadramanda gave birth to the girl named Iravati and her son is elephant the great, Airaavata, 
the protector of world. [3-14-24]

Shlok 25: "And Hari's offspring are lions and sagely/mighty monkeys, while Sharduulii gave birth to baboons and 
tigers. [3-14-25]

Shlok 26: "Then Maatangi's childrenm are elephants, oh, best one among men, Rama, and Shweta gave birth to eight 
elephants that are at eight quarters of world, sustaining the world on their head. [3-14-26]

Shlok 27: "Then, oh Rama, Surabhi gave birth to two daughters, one is named as illustrious Rohini, safe you 
be, and the other is Gandharvi. [3-14-27]

Shlok 28: "Rohini gave birth to cows and other livestock, while Surasa gave birth to Naagaa-s, viz., many headed 
serpents, while Kadru gave birth to ordinary serpents. [3-124-28]

Shlok 29: "Oh, the best among men Rama, the wife of great-soul Kashyapa, lady Manu procreated humans, Brahman--s, 
Kshatriya-s, Vyasya-s, and Shudra-s. [3-14-29]

Shlok 30: "The Brahman-s emerged from face, the Kshatriya-s from chest, the Vyasya-s from two thighs, and the 
Shudra-s from two feet, thus we hear from the scriptures viz., Veda, i.e., Rig Veda Purusha Shuukta. 
[3-14-30]

Shlok 31: "All the merited fruit-bearing trees are given birth by Anala, and now I will narrate about Vinata, 
the daughter's daughter of Shukii, and about Kadru, the sister of Surasa. [3-14-31]

Shlok 32: "Kadru gave birth to a thousand-headed serpent who is the bearer of this earth, and Vinata gave birth 
to two sons namely Garuda and Aruna. [3-14-32]

[Commentary] Garuda is the eagle-vehicle of Lord Vishnu, while Aruna, also called Anuuru, for he is a thigh-less 
being, is the charioteer of Sun's seven-horse chariot. The seven horses of Sun's chariot are the seven 
colours in vibgyor as in a rainbow. Aruna and Garuda are of avian origination and attributed to be the 
speediest propellers, and Jatayu and Sampati belong to that lineage.

Shlok 33: "Oh enemy-destroyer Rama, I took birth from that Aruna, the charioteer of Sun, and my elder brother 
Sampati too, hence know me as Jatayu, the son of Shyenii. [3-14-33]

Shlok 34: "Such as I am, I can be your helpmate at your residence if only you wish me to... oh, boy, this impassable 
forest is a beloved one to predators and demons, isn't it... as such I can take care of Seetha if you 
and Lakshmana go out..." Thus Jatayu said to Rama. [3-14-34]

Shlok 35: Raghava revered Jatayu in his turn by gladly hugging and stood by him with his head bent, and that kind-natured 
Rama is indeed regardful of the friendship of his father with Jatayu that is repeatedly said by Jatayu. 
[3-14-35]

Shlok 36: He that Rama took the princess from Mithila Seetha, and proceeded to Panchavati along with that very 
mighty bird and Lakshmana, as though to incinerate enemies, like fire that burns down grasshoppers. 
[3-14-36]



SARGA 15
------------------------------

[Text] Rama entrusts the construction work of a parNa shaala, straw-cottage 
			in Panchavati, nearby river Godavari. Lakshmana with all his expertise constructs a cosy 
			cottage and they enter it after the ritual of house-entering ceremony. Rama admires Lakshmana 
			for his construction work and as a thanksgiving he embraces Lakshmana and expresses his 
			heart felt feeling about Lakshmana's concern towards Rama.

Shlok 1: Then on going to Panchavati which is full with many serpents and predators, Rama said to splendidly 
brilliant Lakshmana. [3-15-1]

Shlok 2: "We arrived at the place as indicated by the sage, oh, gentle Lakshmana, this region with its flowered 
forests is Panchavati." [3-15-2]

Shlok 3: "In which place we have to situate our hermitage for our liking, for that cast your sight all over the 
forest, and indeed you are an expert in such matters. [3-15-3]

Shlok 4: "In which place Vaidehi, likewise you and me too can take delight, where the woodland is scenic and 
the water is pleasurable, and where a water lake, ritual-firewood, flowers, and the sacred grass are 
available in proximity, oh, Lakshmana, such a place may be searched out. [3-15-4, 5]

[Commentary] Other versions read the jala raamaNyakam as sthala raamaNyakam. Rama desires a place 
that shall be scenic with flower gardens where Seetha can easily pluck flowers in those gardens. And 
it shall be a pleasurable garden for him to recline, or take his bath etc., and thirdly it shall contain 
the ritual paraphernalia within the reach of Lakshmana, so that Lakshmana can provide them to Rama in 
time, with his obedient service.

Shlok 6: When thus said by Rama, Lakshmana adjoined his palms and said this sentence to Rama in the presence 
of Seetha. [3-15-6]

Shlok 7: "I am but a dependent, as long as you are there, may it be for innumerable years, I am your adherent, 
Rama, therefore you yourself tell me to build hermitage in such and such delightful place. [3-15-7]

[Commentary] Lakshmana is an ever adherent of the Supreme Vishnu as he is the thousand-headed serpent namely 
aadi sheSha, on which Vishnu reclines. Even in this incarnation of Rama, Lakshmana says he is the 
same adherent. Thus Lakshmana wants Rama not to say 'you do it your way' but to order 'you do it my 
way.' Further, Lakshmana is saying this in presence of Seetha, siitaa samakSe, because if she 
is not going to accept that place, Rama rejects it. Hence, it firstly is the choice of Seetha on which 
Rama's approval will be automatic. Thus the question of agreeability or disagreeability of Lakshmana 
does not arise. 'Even in this incarnation in the dynasty of Kakutstha as Rama, I am still subservient 
to you, as I was in vaikuNTha , as aadi sheSa . And this tvayi varSa shatam sthite 
: shata is lexically a hundred but also used in its infinitude, thus 'I am anytime servant 
of yours.' svayam tu ruchire deshe : 'Your choice of place is but my pleasure.' This is to 
portray the self-denial of Lakshmana, apart from any individual identity let alone the devotee status, 
total dedication kainkarya, to the Supreme. This is according to Govindaraja.

[Commentary] Adherent nature of Lakshmana is also like that of a younger brother towards his elder brother, for the 
elder brother becomes father-like after the demise of their father. anenapiturantaram yaavat jyeShTho 
jiivati taavat kaniShThasya na svaatantryam itisuucitam | tathaa ca manuH piteva paalayat sutaan jyeShTha 
bhraataa yaviiyasaH| putravat ca api varteran jyeShTho bhraatari dharmataH || dharmaakuutam.

Shlok 8: Rama is gladdened by those words of that great resplendent Lakshmana, and he selected a place that comprised 
of all the attributes. [3-15-8]

Shlok 9: On taking Lakshmana's hand by his hand Rama paced that beautiful place intended for the construction 
of hermitage up and down and spoke to Soumitri this way. [3-15-9]

Shlok 10: "This is an evenly and propitious place surrounded with flowered trees and it is apt of you to erect 
hermitage here, traditionally. [3-15-10]

Shlok 11: "This pleasing lake is seen here adjacently, beaming forth with its lotuses that are similar to sun 
in resplendence, and that are scented fragrantly. [3-5-11]

[Commentary] The Lake is beaming with lotuses that have the resplendence of Sun. Sun is Vishnu's another aspect,
suurya naaraayaNa , and hence that Vishnu is here in the form of lake. The lotus is the abode 
of Goddess Lakshmi and the lake is full with such lotuses, which are in the heart of the lake. As such 
Goddess Lakshmi is in the lotuses, which again are situated in the heart of Vishnu, and hence this is 
a propitious lake to have Vishnu and Lakshmi together.

Shlok 12- 13a: "This River Godavari is also seen from here, surrounded by blooming trees, spread over with swans, and 
beautified with kaarandava, and chakravaaka birds, as that contemplated soul sage Agastya had said. 
[3-15-12]

Shlok 14: "Those soaring mountains are appearing beautiful with many caves, surrounded by flowered trees, flurried 
by animal herds, sounded by peacocks, and they are neither far-off nor very nearby. [3-15-13, 14]

Shlok 15: "Here and there are the golden, silvery and coppery ores on the mountains, and they are shining forth 
like cow-eye ventilators on walls and also like the superb paintings on elephants. [3-15-15]

[Commentary] The gava aksha is cow-eye, meaning the cow-eye shaped ventilators of walls. The bhakti 
is the name for coloured graphical drawings on the body of elephants. Apart from the howdah and other 
ornamentations, the elephants are richly painted in colours during ceremonial occasions, even today. 
As such Rama is visualising the ore deposits on the mountains as cow-eye like ventilators on walls, 
and as superb streaks of paintings on the bodies of elephants.

Shlok 16: "These mountains are brightening with trees of Saala, Palmyra, Tamaala, Date Palms, Jackfruit and also 
thus with Punnaagaa. With Chuuta - Sweet Mango; Ashoka, Tialaka, even with Ketaka, Champaka trees, And 
even with Syandana, Sandalwood, Niipa, Paarnasa, Lakuch, dhava, Ashwakarna, Khadira, Shamii, Kimshuka, 
Paatala trees, and entwined are those and those trees with flowered shrubs, and along with climbers, 
and thus they brighten the mountains. [3-15-16, 17, 18]

Shlok 19: "This place is holy, this is delightful and this is with many animals and birds, hence Soumitri, let 
us reside here along with this bird Jatayu." Thus said Rama to Lakshmana. [3-15-19]

Shlok 20: Thus said by Rama to that remover of foe's valour and one with very great might, namely Lakshmana, he 
briskly erected a hermitage for his brother. [3-15-20]

Shlok 21- 22- 23: Lakshmana built a very spacious straw-cottage there levelling and raising the clay for raised floor 
of the cottage, strongly pillared with long bamboos, thereupon on those pillars excellent rafters are 
made, and the branches of Shamii trees are spread out, twined firmly with twines of jute strands, and 
with the cross-laid bamboos for thatching, and over that blades of Kusha grass and leaves of Kaasha 
are spread and well over-covered for the roof, and thus that very great mighty Lakshmana made that best 
and very spacious straw-cottage with a levelled surface for residence of Raghava in the interests of 
Raghava alone, and it resulted as a feast to the eye. [3-15-21, 22, 23]

Shlok 24: On his going to River Godavari that noble Lakshmana bathed and on gathering lotuses and fruits he returned 
to the cottage. [3-15-24]

Shlok 25: Then making flowery offerings and peace-invocations also procedural to gR^iha 
pravesha , entering a new house,] started to show the constructed hermitage to Rama. [3-15-25]

Shlok 26: On seeing the beautifully constructed hermitage along with Seetha, Rama is highly gladdened in respect 
that straw-cottage. [3-15-26]

Shlok 27: Then Rama very highly gladdened Rama embraced Lakshmana tightly by both of his hands, and spoke these 
friendly words to him. [3-15-27]

Shlok 28: "Oh, masterful one, I am very happy about you for you have done a great deed, for that reason I am giving 
what I have to give to you a hugging. [3-5-28]

Shlok 29: "You are the knower of others feelings, knower of many skills, and the knower of what is right and honest, 
oh, Lakshmana, such as you are, being with you I deem that my virtue-souled father is not gone and forgotten. 
[3-15-29]

[Commentary] The word bhaavaj~naH means here as the knower of other's feelings. Lakshmana is well aware of 
such things while talking with sages, his brothers, his mothers and his ministers like Hanuma and other 
subjects. Here also Lakshmana knew the feelings of Rama as to how the cottage is envisioned by Rama, 
with due privacy to Rama and Seetha, with a porch, worship-room, and an accommodation for himself.
kR^itaj~na is masterly craftsmanship and flair for doing all deeds of sublime nature, but not 
'faithful' in routine sense. dharmaj~naH is knower of honesty. Though he himself is a prince, 
Lakshmana did not construct the cottage for his comfort, but the convenience of Rama and Seetha are 
counted firstly. The word dharmaatmaa , virtue souled one, can also be prefixed to Dasharatha 
like dharmaatmaa mama pitaa virtue-souled, my, father, meaning that 'the virtue-souled Dasharatha 
has left you behind him for my sake, because you are arranging all the things for me, as a father would 
naturally do for his son.' The word sam vR^ittaH in the observation of Dr. Satya Vrat in his 
book 'The Ramayana - A Linguistic Study is:--  This word has been found used in a rather remarkable sense 
[in Ramayana.] It is 'to die'. sam vR^ittaH means dead. Ordinarily samvR^ittaH has 
quite the opposite sense, viz., 'born', i.e., father Dasharatha took rebirth as Lakshmana, to provide 
for the needs of Rama.

[Commentary] And Dharmaakuutam says that, anena 
mR^ite api pitaadhaarmikeNa putreNa amR^ita iti suucitam | tathaa ca vaajasaneya braahmaNa~N-- 'saputreNa 
eva asmin loke pratitiShThati -- ' iti | sa ca pitaa svayam mR^ite apidhaarmiksya putrasy shariireNa 
eva asmin loke yathaa shaastram karma kurvan tiShThatiiti artham|| dhamaakuutam Hence 
Rama said in this concept also that - 'my father is though 'dead', but 'born' again in you, Lakshmana.'

Shlok 30: On saying thus to Lakshmana, Raghava, the enhancer of magnificence comfortably resided in that province 
which is with many a fruit. [3-15-30]

[Commentary] The last word sukhii is read as vashii in other mms meaning that Rama 'with his senses 
controlled' lived there. That is to suggest the overcoming of the enchantment of Suurpanakha.

Shlok 31: While Seetha and Lakshmana devoted themselves to that righteous Rama, he resided in Panchavati like 
a Divinity in heavenly world for sometime to come. [3-15-30]



SARGA 16
------------------------------

[Text] On one day before the sunrise Rama proceeds to River Godavari for daily bath along with 
			Seetha and Lakshmana. On the way looking at the nature around Lakshmana eulogises winter 
			season. In doing so he casts aspersions on queen Kaikeyi, and Rama reproves it.

Shlok 1: Pleasant hemantha R^itu , pre-winter season has set in after the passage of sharat R^itu, 
post-rainy season at Panchavati where the noble souled Rama is staying comfortably. [4-16-1]

Shlok 2: On some day when night faded into dawn Rama started for the delightful River Godavari for a bath. [4-16-2]

Shlok 3: His valorous brother Saumitri following him humbly with a handy vessel, along with Seetha, spoke this 
to Rama. [4-16-3]

Shlok 4: "Adorned by which season the promising year will be bright, oh, pleasant conversationalist, and which 
season will also be pleasant to you, that hemanta season has set in. [4-16-4]

Shlok 5: "These days the dew is harsh to the bodies of people, earth is overlaid with crops, water is unenjoyable, 
but fire is delightful. [4-16-5]

Shlok 6: "On appeasing manes with worships during northern solstice and even on performing solstitial rituals 
in time, the righteous people are becoming free from evils. [4-16-6]

[Commentary] The ritual agraayaNa is a havis , oblation performed after the arrival of harvest 
at home from fields and before the start of its usage. Usually this is the time of Makara Sankranti, 
the starting day of northern solstice. na anviShTa aagraayaNe na aahitaagni navasya 
ashniiyaat vriihiinaam yavaanaam shyaamakaanaam iti agra paakasya yajeta -- aapasthamba suutra

Shlok 7: "Amply fulfilled are the desires of the villagers with the affluence of milch cows and dairy, and the 
vanquishing kings are make moves for the purposes of their further vanquishes. [4-16-7]

Shlok 8: "While the sun is steadfastly attending the direction of Time-god Yama, namely southern horizon, the 
northern direction is not brilliant like a woman who lost the vermilion mark on her forehead. [4-16-8]

[Commentary] The tilaka is the vermilion mark of sindur , vermilion-red powder specially made out 
of turmeric and limejuice and other ingredients and called as kunkuma . This is sacred and 
used in daily worships and applied as a mark on forehead at a place where the Third Eye, j~naana 
netra is said to exist. For the women this mark is for their glorification of womanhood by virtue 
of the existence of her husband. Should she become a widow this mark is made no more and her face will 
become dullish for she is without a husband. So also the sun is such a mark on the forehead of the woman 
called horizon. Without him no quarters glitter.

Shlok 9: "By their very nature Himalayas are the depositories of snow, and presently distanced from the sun they 
are very obviously snowy true to their name. [4-16-9]

Shlok 10: "By the way of touch the mid days are comfortable and in these days the daytime is very much comfortable 
for sauntering, thus the sun in daytimes is genial and ungenial are the shades and waters. [4-16-10]

Shlok 11: "Overwhelmed by snow presently the noontimes are with soft sun, with bitter cold, with mists and wintry 
breezes, and with them the forests too are bleak in their sheen. [4-16-11]

Shlok 12: "Precluded is the reclining under open sky as the nights are led by the Pushya constellation, they will 
now be with brownish-grey fog and chilly, and prolonged are the lengths of nights whereby the three 
watches of night will be quickly slipping away.

[Commentary] The three yaamaa-s or praharaH-s, are three hours or three watches, where each 
yaama, is three hours. The commentators said that nivR^itta aakaasha shayanaa : precluded 
are troubles to those that are reclining in heavens i.e., divine beings; vR^iddha tara tri yaamaa 
: prolonged are the nightly activities of demons. puSya aaniitaa , where puSya also 
means Kali, the doom, and the demons are brining it up. Thus Lakshmana is said to have reminded Rama 
about the purpose of his incarnation, where the gods are precluded from a restful reclining, the nightly 
activities of demons are on the increase, and the demons are bringing doom time, so Rama has to quicken 
their eradication.

Shlok 13: "Transgressed is the destiny of moon by the sun as moon lost the chance of keeping people happy with 
his lustrousness in these days, thus the lustreless moon remained in a blushing sphere with fog, just 
like a mirror blinded by the fog of a suspire. [4-16-13]

Shlok 14: "Even on a full moon day the moonlight is unbright blemished by mist, and it is appearing like brightly 
Seetha becoming swarthy by sun's heat, but not brightly. [4-16-14]

Shlok 15: "The western breeze by itself will be cool to touch, but presently charged with snow it is wafting doubly 
chilly in the early hours. [4-16-15]

[Commentary] The vernal breeze will be cool by its nature and so is the Omnipotent. Now the snowy dew enriches the 
breeze's coolness. So also the Omnipotent, namely Rama, is doubly cool by the coolness of the prayers 
of divinities and the sages as well. Govindaraja.

Shlok 16: "Covered with the dew the forests that already covered with crop fields of barley and wheat are beaming 
forth, together with the callings of waterfowls, at the rise of the sun. [4-16-16]

[Commentary] The sun now risen is Rama. The word baaSpa also means tears. The fertile lands are shedding 
tears in fear of Ravana. Again baaSpaH is vapour that spreads. Rama's benevolence is spreading 
like vapour. The forests are with full crops. The lands are full with asceticism and Vedic practices 
to receive the mercy of Rama. The birds' callings are the echoing of Vedic sonority. Govindaraja. The
yava grains are not exactly western barley grains as usually shown in lexicons. It is called 
locally as jov dhaan and is used in fire oblations, . It is a dietary prescription to diabetics 
nowadays.

Shlok 17: "The paddy crops in fields are gleaming forth with golden lustre, and their heads full with grain and 
a little bent down are shapely like the flowers of date-fruit. [4-16-17]

[Commentary] The heads of crops are a little bent down by weight of corn, like the heads of sages who bow down with 
the weight of knowledge before the Absolute. Thus their age-old golden hair is gleaming at the first 
rays of sun. Govindaraja.

Shlok 18: "Though he came up long back, and though his beams are spreading around, besieged by snowy mist the 
sun is appearing as moon. [4-16-18]

[Commentary] The sun again is Rama. 'Though you have risen in the vast of forests long back and avowed to eradicate 
demons, has your radiance decreased like the vernal sun, while the demons are still radiant by their 
activities...' is the question of Lakshmana. Govindaraja.

Shlok 19: Inappreciable is the warmth of sun in the mornings, but comfortable for touch at noontimes, since the 
reddish but a little palish sunshine is radiating on earth. [4-16-19]

[Commentary] The warmth of the sun is his valour which is usurped by the snowy mist. Rama's valour is usurped or 
inappreciable by his taciturnity. Then Lakshmana is deemed to have said, 'The demons are dominating 
the nature with their cold-blooded activities like coldish snow, oh, Rama, sustaining them with kind 
of cool profile of yours is inapt of you...' Govindaraja.

Shlok 20: "The pasturelands are a little moistened with the fall of dewdrops, but the fields of forest are enlivened 
by the radiance of tender sun's warmth. [4-16-20]

[Commentary] The pastureland are like the serene sages who are wetting their faces with droplets of merciful tears 
by the activities of the demons. And now the warmth of the tender sun / valour of Rama, is radiating 
on the countenances of pasturelands/sages which will be furious henceforth. Govindaraja.

Shlok 21: "On easily touching very clear and cold water with its very broad trunk that intensely thirsty wild 
elephant is backing away its trunk for the water is that cold. [4-16-21]

[Commentary] Gods are withdrawing to touch pleasurable items that are usually enjoyable to them, fearing Ravana. 
Govindaraja

Shlok 22: "These waterfowls that are sitting nearby are not entering into waters like cowards not entering battlefields. 
[4-16-22]

[Commentary] The waterfowls are compared with the sages. The sages though staying nearby asceticism, like birds sitting 
on riverbanks, are not able to enter into its enjoyable main realm, namely samaadhi, concentration. 
Another way is 'oh Rama, though you are an expert in warfare why you are backing away for a war with 
demons? Why not jump to it? Are you like these fearing waterfowls?'

Shlok 23: "Subdued by snowy darkness, enclosed in misty gloom, and reft of flowers these forest ranges appear 
like those that are asleep. [4-16-23]

[Commentary] Mantled by darkness and dewdrops dribbling, the leaves and leaflets are crouched and look like sleeping 
ones. Further blanketed by the mist they are appearing as those that are sleeping covering a blanket. 
Flowers are not blooming like the closed eyes of a sleeper. Thus the woodlands are asleep. Govindaraja.

[Commentary] For those who are asleep it is a double darkness. One is the darkness of sleep, while the other is the 
darkness of night. They not only crouch in themselves with the inner darkness, but as they are also 
enfolded by the external darkness of night, they further crouch in. Maheshvara Tiirtha. By this sleep 
attribute, the dormant disposition of sages is made evident.

Shlok 24: "Now the rivers are imperceptible as their water is overspread with dewdrops, but their water-birds 
are perceptible only by their callings, thus making that river perceptible, and such rivers are now 
glistening with moist sandbanks and shores. [4-16-24]

[Commentary] By rivers the sages are denominated and they are all enshrouded by the mist called the fear of demons, 
and they are perceptible just by their groaning. They are unable to come out of that misty climate, 
as good as waterfowls dependent on rivers.

Shlok 25: "Owing to the fall of snow, further owing to the softness and coldness of sun, the water deep down the 
wells is generally agreeable for drinking. [4-16-25]

[Commentary] This falling of the snow is indicative of the falling of demons upon sages, and sun's softness is with 
the soft attitude of Rama. Tiirtha.

Shlok 26: "Lotus lakes are left alone with stalks of lotuses as their petals are aged and withered, decrepit are 
the fibrils and carpels, thus impaired by cold they are ungracious in look. [4-16-26]

[Commentary] When the demons destroy the lake-like hermitages and their inmates, aged and withered sages and their 
lotus-petal like austerities are shattered by the hostilities of demons, and the remaining hermits are 
just like the stalks of lotuses left behind.

Shlok 27: "But during this time, oh, manly-tiger, ushered by anguish that virtue souled one Bharata must be practising 
ascesis in city with adoration to you. [4-16-27]

Shlok 28: "On forsaking kingdom and pride of becoming the king of Ayodhya as well, and varied and various pleasures 
too, he is in self-denial, and with his food regulated he sleeps on chilly surface of earth. [4-16-28]

[Commentary] So far Lakshmana spoke about spring season indicating the sufferings of saints and sages by the chill 
and icy effects of demons indirectly. Now his broodings are turning to Bharata, for Bharata is avowed 
to self-immolate if Rama were not to come after a fixed time, and Rama is lingering here.

Shlok 29: "Even he might always be getting up at this time of the day and proceeding to River Sarayu for a bath 
surrounded by ministers, definite is that. [4-16-29]

Shlok 30: "But how can he who is brought up in high comfort, a delicate one too, enter the cold-wet waters of 
River Sarayu, in these small hours. [4-16-30]

[Commentary] The compound atyanta sukha samvriddhaH brought up in comfort is but natural to a prince, but 
it is in its princely loftiness. But our father King Dasharatha has made it loftier. And you by your 
brotherly caring , you also looked Bharata. atyanata sukumaaraH  by his feelings he is a delicate 
one who cannot tolerate your absence'. In other mms it is sukhochita in place of hima aardra 
which means  one who is habituated to pleasures of a younger prince,' but not to become a monk in these 
early years of his youth. So you should relieve him of his vow. This is the import of Lakshmana's address 
to Rama.

Shlok 31: "That lotus-petal eyed one with blue-black complexion is an imposing one with lion-like waist, being 
the noblest he is knower of dharma thus an advocate of truth, and thus intolerant of ignominy, and as 
a self-restrained one he talks dearly and sweetly, and he is dextrous and an enemy-destroyer, such as 
he is, that Bharata on forgoing all of his various pleasures he is devoted to you, as you alone are 
his adorable brother. [4-16-31, 32]

[Commentary] Stomachless is not to say that Bharata is without a stomach but has a palm-like concave stomach, but 
not a potbelly to stomach the kingdom of Ayodhya that is easily usurped through his mother Kaika.

Shlok 33: "Even though you are in forests far away from him, he is following you in the practise of austerities, 
and such a brother of yours, that great-souled Bharata has refused ascent to heaven. [4-16-33]

[Commentary] Bharata though staying in kingdom he is observing asceticism following the trend of Rama. By grief Bharata 
might have been dead, like King Dasharatha, and ascended to heavens. But Bharata's going to heavens 
is a hindrance in getting a glimpse of Rama after return from exile. So Bharata's refusing the heavens 
is said to be his conquering heavens. Lakshmana is quickening Rama's thinking to take some action to 
complete his mission in eradicating the demonic atrocities and quickly return to Ayodhya, lest time 
slips by and Bharata may self-immolate. After these many thoughts, now Lakshmana starts to move the 
eye of the needle towards Kaikeyi, the root cause for all miseries.

Shlok 34: "  Humans do not derive father's attitude but they take of their mothers' is the well-know maxim in 
the world, but Bharata rendered it otherwise. [4-16-34]

[Commentary] This is a proverbial saying that humans inherit mother's characteristics but not father's. But Bharata 
renders it otherwise for he has not inherited the mean and sordid nature of Kaikeyi. This proverbial 
saying is still in use in all languages in India, with a little change. In Marathi it is khaanaa 
tashii maatii va jaatii tashii potii' after Dr. Satya Vrat. This stems up from the Sanskrit
dhanyaa 
pitR^i mukhii kanyaa dhanyaa maatR^i mukhaH sutaH 'Blest is father-like daughter, 
blest is mother-like son.'

Shlok 35: "Whose husband is Dasharatha and whose son is gentle Bharata, how then can she, our mother Kaikeyi, 
is with this sort of cruel disposition, indeed " Thus Lakshmana spoke to Rama on their way to River 
Godavari. [4-16-35]

[Commentary] Rama uses the same wording for Kaikeyi as  our middle mother' at 3-2-19b-20

Shlok 36: When that upright Lakshmana is speaking those words that way out of his fondness towards Rama, Raghava 
spoke to Lakshmana, intolerant of that slanderous talk about their mother. [4-16-36]

Shlok 37: "In any way, dear Lakshmana, you are not supposed to deplore another mother of ours, but you go on telling 
the topics of Bharata, the king of Ikshvaku-s. [4-16-37]

Shlok 38: "My mind is indeed set to dwell only in forest, and it is firmly avowed, but while yearning for Bharata's 
fellowship my fascination to reunite with him is recurring again. [4-16-38]

Shlok 39: "I reminisce his words well, that are genial, sweet, heartily, ambrosial and that will gladden the heart. 
[4-16-39]

Shlok 40: "When can I really reunite, oh, Lakshmana, with great-souled Bharata, valorous Shatrughna, and with 
you and Seetha." Thus said Rama to Lakshmana. [4-16-40]

[Commentary] Usually the word ca means 'also, and.' In compound tvayaa ca raghunandana it is said 
to indicate Seetha.

Shlok 41: Thus worrying that way while proceeding, there Rama reached River Godavari and performed bathing with 
his younger brother Lakshmana and along with Seetha. [4-16-41]

Shlok 42: Then on offering water oblations to manes and gods that impeccant trinity extolled the rising sun and 
gods likewise. [4-16-42]

Shlok 43: On taking bath in the river along with Seetha and Lakshmana, Rama shone forth like All-controlling god 
Rudra, who will be radiant on taking bath along with his consort Paarvati and with his follower Nandi, 
the Holy Bull. [4-16-43]

[Commentary] The similitude between Rama and Shiva suggests that Rama is about to start destruction of demons.



The portrayal of seasons in epics with all their delicacies is 
a disputed topic. Ramayana also deals much on these descriptions of seasons. Whether an epic avowed 
to reflect the Vedic import, as said at 1-4-6, vedopabR^ihmaNaarthaaya , and that which is 
pious and merited puNyam vedaischa samamatam at 1-1-98, should have accounts on seasons   is 
the question. For this is said that relating niceties of season time and again, is in perfect accord 
with Veda, for the season and time are subservient to all Veda-s as per the ancillary of Veda, the Astrology,
veda-anga : jyotiShya . Veda-s themselves say that the year is the soul of the horse of Ashvameda.
uShaa 
vaa ashvasya medhasya shiraH | sa~Nvatsara aatmaashvasya medhasya | -- yajurveda bR^ihadaaraNyaka 
Hence time and season are the mind and soul of all Veda-s.



Like this we find beautification of four seasons at four places, 
for e.g., hemanta spring is narrated in starting of Kishkindha. And vasanta post autumnal 
season is described in Kishkindha 43rd chapter, when Hanuma and others are in search for Seetha, and 
after their exit from the cave of Swayamprabha. varSa rainy season is portrayed in 28th chapter 
of Kishkindha. At every possible occasion, all the rituals, daily routines that are time oriented, do 
explain the importance of time than the importance of ritual or daily routine. It is said:
vedopabR^ihmaNaartham 
pravR^itte asmin granthe veda vihita karma apekShita kaala visheSha nirNaayakatvaat kaala saadhaaraNa 
lakShaNa pratipaadanam eva tat tat R^itu varNana vyaajena kR^itam iti dharmopayoga sambhavaat | -- saayam 
kaalaadi cihna pratipaadanam iti etat sarvam karma anuShTaana upayukta kaala j~naapanaartham eva kR^itam 
iti dharma paryavasaanam sambhavati eva -- dharmaakuutam



Thus dharma is upheld in 
all these narratives about the season and time, which aspect is upheld by the commentators and they 
too comment lengthily whenever a season or time factor occurs.



SARGA 17
------------------------------

[Text] Shuurpanakha, the problem demoness of Ramayana enters here. She approaches the cottage of Rama and offers 
her wifehood to Rama. She is the sister of Ravana and her husband Vidyut Jihva was murdered by Ravana 
alone, rendering his own sister a widow. She being an age-old demoness wants Rama to marry her, leaving 
Seetha off.

Shlok 1: On taking bath Rama with Seetha and Soumitri, then went to his own hermitage from that bank of River 
Godavari. [3-17-1]

Shlok 2: Nearing that hermitage Raghava along with Lakshmana performed early morning rituals and then reached 
the cottage. [3-17-2]

Shlok 3: There Rama comfortably spent time while being adored by eminent sages when he is with them, and narrating 
many a narrative while sitting in hermitage along with Seetha and his brother Lakshmana, thus he shone 
forth like the moon when with Chitra constellation. [3-1-7-3, 4]

[Commentary] The Chitra star is with clearest whiteness against the sky-blue background and thus it is said citra 
mauktikam ekam 'Chitra star and a pearl are one in colour.' Thus sky-blue coloured Rama is the 
moon while pearl white Seetha is pearl white Chitra star.

Shlok 5: At one time when Rama is sitting in hermitage and heartily absorbed in telling narratives some demoness 
arrived at that place, fortuitously. [3-17-5]

Shlok 6: She is but the sister of ten-faced demon Ravana, Shuurpanakha by her name and she has seen him on reaching 
the paradisiacal being like Rama. [3-17-6]

Shlok 7: He whose face is radiant, arms lengthy, eyes large like lotus petals, stride like that of an elephant, 
wearing bunches of hair-tufts, delicate yet greatly vigorous, possessor of all kingly aspects, complexion 
deep-blue like blue lotus, similar to Love-god in brilliance and in simile to Indra, the demoness has 
seen such a Rama and became lovesick. [3-17-7, 8, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10- 11- 12a: She that demoness who is facially unpleasant one with that pleasant faced one, pot bellied one with 
the slim-waisted one, wry-eyed one with the broad-eyed one, coppery-haired one with the neatly tressed 
one, ugly featured one with the charming featured one, brassy voiced one with the gentle voiced one, 
deplorably oldish one with the youngish one, crooked talker with the pleasant talker, ill-mannered one 
with the well-mannered one, uncouth one with couth, abominable one with amiable Rama spoke, besieged 
by Love-god. [3-17-9b, 11, 12a]

Shlok 12b- 13: "You are an ascetic yet with a wife, handling bow and arrows yet in the appearance of a sage  what for 
you have come to this province frequented by demons  it will be apt of you to tell the purpose of your 
coming here, in actuality " [3-17-12b, 13]

Shlok 14: Thus asked by demoness Shuurpanakha that enemy-scorcher Rama started to inform all about it, straightforwardly. 
[3-17-14]

Shlok 15: "A king named Dasharatha was there with his godlike valour, I am his eldest son, and people hear of 
me by name Rama. [3-17-15]

Shlok 16: "He is Lakshmana by his name, my younger brother and a devoted follower of mine, and she is my wife, 
daughter of Videha's king, well-known as Seetha. [3-17-16]

Shlok 17: "Desiring to implement the probity in following father's orders and for the sake of establishing probity 
in living an ascetic's life I have come here to forests to dwell, as enjoined by the directives of the 
king and my father, and by my mother, as well. [3-17-17]

Shlok 18: "I too wish to know about you. Whose wife are you? What is your name? Or, whose daughter are you? By 
the way, you are with a most enthralling personality, and then you must be a demoness. [3-17-18]

[Commentary] So far the handsomeness of Shuurpanakha is not narrated in these verses. But Rama's addressing her as 
a handsome woman is for fun sake, so some commentators say. The episode Shuurpanakha is considered to 
have haasya rasa, comic relief. Refusing the unnecessarily joking of Rama some say that Shuurpanakha 
came there with an exquisite form. And what all said negatively about her in preceding verses is the 
implicit idea of the poet. Taking the entrance of Shuurpanakha with a beautiful personality every cinema 
that is shot on Ramayana gives a cabaret dance with inciting song to Shuurpanakha at this situation.

[Commentary] In some other mms there are a few more verses that contain a situation where Jatayu comes to Rama to 
take leave of him to go and see his relatives and bird-friends, after Rama returns from the river. Then, 
knowing that Jatayu is not there Shuurpanakha enters the cottage area with a guise of winsome beauty. 
No demon or demoness can approach that cottage of Rama, as long as Jatayu is there - is the point for 
establishment. While the difference in mms/texts is between one or two letters like, na hi taavat 
manoj~na angii and tvam hi taavat manoj~na angii , whether the poet entered Shuurpanakha 
in a fashionable getup or as an old female is another point that remained inconclusive.

Shlok 19: "What for you have come, either, you tell in actuality..." Thus Rama asked her. On hearing the words 
of Rama she that demoness wetted with love said these words. [3-17-19]

Shlok 20- 21a: "I will tell you truth, Rama, nothing but truth, I am a guise-changing demoness named Shuurpanakha, 
and I will be freely moving in this forest in a solitary manner and unnerving all. [3-17-20, 21a]

Shlok 21b- 22a: "My brother is valorous and mighty Ravana, the king of demons and the son of Vishravasa, if ever you 
have heard of him. [3-17-21b, 22a]

Shlok 22b- 23: "And the mighty Kumbhakarna who will always be in profound sleep is my brother, and the virtue-souled 
Vibheeshana too is my brother, but he does not behave like a demon, and two more bothers of mine are 
Khara and Duushana who are renowned for their bravery in war. [3-17-22b, 23

Shlok 24: "I can excel all of them by my bravery, oh, Rama, and on seeing you for the first time I had a notion 
that you being the choicest among men you alone are my husband, hence I neared you. [3-17-24]

Shlok 25: "I am endowed with such preponderances and I can operate with my independent might, as such you become 
my everlasting husband  by the way, what can you bring off with Seetha. [3-17-25]

Shlok 26: "Unlovely and unshapely is this one, such as she is, this Seetha is unworthy to be your wife, and I 
am the lone one worthy to be your wife, hence treat me as your wife. [3-17-26]

Shlok 27: "Shall I eat up this disfigured, dishonest, diabolical human female with a hallow stomach along with 
him, that brother of yours to make you free.

[Commentary] Lakshmana will use the very same wording in the next chapter when retorting Shuurpanakha.

Shlok 28: "Afterwards, you can lustily ramble about Dandaka forest along with me while enjoying yourself on various 
mountaintops in the sky and in forests on the earth." So Shuurpanakha said to Rama. [3-17-28]

Shlok 29: When he is said that way Rama chuckled and that wordsmith started to reply her who eyes are besotted 
in lovesickness with this sentence. [3-17-29]



SARGA 18
------------------------------

[Text] Rama averts Shuurpanakha's advances toward him and asks her to seek Lakshmana instead. Lakshmana 
			uses wordplay in retorting her in her own words. But she takes the apparent meaning of Lakshmana's 
			words and rushes to eat away Seetha. Lakshmana defaces her and she noisily runs away from 
			there, only to report to her brother Khara, a violent demon. This is the triggering situation 
			of another round of troubles to Rama and Ramayana.

Shlok 1: Rama then voicing clearly and softly spoke to her, whom the noose of lust has tethered down, with a 
smile preceding his words. [3-18-1]

Shlok 2: "Oh, honourable one, I am married and this is my dear wife, thus it will be distressing for your sort 
of females to live with a co-wife. [3-18-2]

Shlok 3: "He is my younger brother named Lakshmana, he is with a good conduct, good looking, a promising and 
valiant one, and he is without a wife. [3-18-3]

[Commentary] Rama is punning here. In punning apparent meaning will be different than the latent and the apparent 
appears to an untruth. Then if it is questioned whether Rama tells a lie while joking or punning, it 
is not so: nyaaya - guruuNam api samam haasyam kartavyam kutilam vinaa 'even with teachers 
one can be humorous, if it is not fraudulent'. According to dharmaakuutam which quotes 
gautam suutra: vivaaha maithuna narma aatra saMyogeSu adoSakakameke anR^itam; and in aapad 
dharma suutra: na narma yuktam anR^itam hi na asti na striiSu raajan na vivaaha kaale 'at the time 
of marriage or copulation or with women talking untruth [or with innuendo, or punning,] is not wrong.'

[Commentary] Again if it be asked whether Rama really said in jocular way or in real sense, it is said that he has 
not joked. navevamapi raama vacanam parihaasa ruupamiti katham nishcitamiti cet na for this 
Rama's words at 3-18-19 will suffice, saumitre parihaasaH kathaMcana 'Lakshmana.... no joking 
with this kind of beings please...' dharmaakuutam.

[Commentary] Rama is known to be a jovial talker, na vitathaa parihaasa kathhasvapi Here for the word
a kR^ita daaraH apparently means 'not, made, wife= wife not available.' But Lakshmana is married 
and Rama says here he is unmarried. Then Rama must have bluffed! Not so, that compound is in its subtext 
means: 'one who did not make his wife to come along, hence there is no wife.' Govindaraja.

[Commentary] In another way, the word a in a kR^ite also means antaHpura according to 
the thesaurus of a and it is said as: akaaro brahma vishNu iisha kamaTheSva~NgaNe, gaurave 
antaHpure palace-chambers of queens; and thus the meaning is as: 'one who left behind his wife 
in palace-chambers, hence he has no wife.'

Shlok 4: "He is without a wife and in need of a wife  he is youthful, good-looking and he can become a fitly 
husband of yours, fit enough to your kind of features. [3-18-4]

[Commentary] The word apuurvi means in the viewpoint of Rama 'one who has been missing the company of wife 
for a long' but in Shuurpanakha's view it is 'one who is missing the company of ANY wife for a long...' 
The word bhaaryaa ca arthii is from Rama's view 'desiring his own wife, Urmila' but in Shuurpanakha's 
view 'desiring ANY woman as wife' and the word te bhartaa is declined as te.abhartaa= te 
a bhartaa 'unfit to be your husband' because of your ruupasya asyaa 'by your aspect, your 
repulsive aspect.' Govindaraja.

[Commentary] In another way akR^ita daaraH 'already a married man' apuurvii 'one who does not have 
the comfort from wife' so bharyayaa ca arthii; a + puurva bhaaryayaa ca arthii 'for a new wife, 
also, desiring one; one who is desiring new wife; thus you are a fitly wife for him by your aspect,
anuruupascha te . This is on joculary side of the statement parihaasa anukuula praatiitaka 
artha. The implicit meaning is akR^ita daaraH 'one without a wife now or one who does 
not take another wife.' apuurva bhaaryayaa by first wife alone, arthii he is desired;
shiilavaan, eka patnii vrata shiila vantaH an abider in the syndrome of 'one-man-one-wife.'
priya darshanaH 'in dear ones, tend towards; tending towards his dear ones.' te.abhrtaa= 
te + a + bhartaa 'for you, no, husband; he is no husband of yours, he can never be your husband.'
anu ruupaH 'fit for his own wife.' asya ruupasya yogya bhaviSyati? 'with this kind 
of, aspect of yours   for you with such a notorious aspect, will he be eligible to become your husband? 
No, he will not.' Maheshvara Tiirtha.

[Commentary] The word apuurvi is categorised under rare and unfamiliar words. It is said that as per rock 
edicts it is a traveller, brahmacaari celibate, who is studying apuurva, namely Veda-s. 
As mimaamsikaa-s tell us that apuurva is divineness, results from Vedic knowledge. 
Here the celibate state of Lakshmana is said to have been referred, 'though he is having his wife Urmila, 
he is undergoing celibacy.' And further 'In Gorresio's text it is there as taruNo bhaaryayaa ca 
arthii where taruNa is youthfulness. Rama is also youthful. So Rama's expression of
apurvii is just to indicate Lakshmana as a brahmacaari a celibate, though he has a 
wife and youthful also. After Prof. Satya Vrat. Unchained is he by nuptial bands: is Griffith's wording.

Shlok 5: "You woo him, oh, board-eyed [bulged-eyed] one, this brother of mine as your husband like sunshine seeking 
the Mt. Meru, then oh, great-waisted [pot-bellied] one, you will be without a co-wife " So said Rama 
to that demoness. [3-18-5]

[Commentary] The sunshine seeking Mt. Meru will spread over it, and on going at its behind, the sun disappears along 
with his shine. Such a massive mountain is that. Thus Mt. Meru is an absolver nivR^itti pradaata 
of sunshine. So also you reach Lakshmana and become absolved in him / by him. Govindaraja. Secondly, 
you adore Lakshmana like bhartaaram a husband, a Providence of all in the universe. Maheshvara 
Tiirtha.

Shlok 6: When Rama clearly told that way to that demoness dazed in lust, discarding Rama quickly then she spoke 
to Lakshmana. [3-18-6]

Shlok 7: "I with my best complexion will be your deserving wife meetly to you charm, you can happily take a jaunt 
all over Dandaka forest along with me." So Shuurpanakha ran after Lakshmana. [3-18-7]

Shlok 8: Thus said by the demoness that meaningful sentence maker Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra, then smiled 
and appropriately replied Shuurpanakha. [3-18-8]

Shlok 9: "How you wish to become a female servant, oh, [black] lotus-coloured one, by becoming the wife of a 
servant like me? I am just a vassal of my adorable brother. [3-18-9]

Shlok 10: "Oh, goggle eyed one, befitting to your complexion that is un-stainable further you better become the 
wife of my brother Rama who is abounding in means, and on becoming the younger wife of that adorable 
one, you too will achieve your means and thus you will be happy. [3-18-10]

[Commentary] The word samR^iddha artha is 'abounding in the means of salvation.' arthobhidheyaraiH vastu 
prayojana nivR^itteSu nivR^itti 'Rama will accord salvation to you, should you adore him as your 
ultimate husband, thereby your means too are achieved and you can be happy.' The compound mudita 
amala varnaNi when declined as a + mudita; mala varNinii will mean: ' you have no happiness, 
filthy is your complexion.' yaviiyasii bhaaryaa; 'you are an unhappy creature with a filthy 
complexion and you will become a worst possible wife of Rama... do you wish to become at least that 
worst wife? No, never you can.' Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 11: "On discarding her who is disfigured, dishonest, diabolically deleterious old wife with a hallow stomach 
that Rama will adore you alone. [3-18-11]

[Commentary] Lakshmana tolerates anything but lets no fly to fly over Seetha. He may defy his brother Rama, but never 
tolerates belittlement of Seetha, and lets none to insult her. Now he is retorting Shuurpanakha in the 
same words she used in last chapter when she was speaking about Seetha.

[Commentary] Here Govindaraja says, viruupaama asatiim karaalaam nirNatatodariim vR^idhaam tvaam parityajya enaam 
bhaaryaam eva eSa 'oh, Shuurpanakha you are un-shapely, unworthy etc., so Rama will leave you off, 
and adores his own wife, Seetha only...' Govindaraja.

[Commentary] Next, Maheshvara Tirtha says the same verse with reference to Seetha, it is: vi + ruupaam= visheSa 
ruupaam= tri loka sundariim with a particular excellence in her beauty in all three worlds; 
a + satiim= na anya pativrataa syaat samam vaa adhikam none, equalling or better in husband-adoration;
karaalaam= karaalo daMture tunge daaruNe api ca, tallish; nirNata udariim hallow-stomached, 
slender-waisted, the first attribute a comely lady should have; vR^iddhaam= j~naana, shiila, guNa 
saMvR^ddhi 'abounding with intellect, character, conduct etc., not just years of age...'

[Commentary] 'Seetha is one with a particular excellence in her beauty in all three worlds, none is equalling or 
higher to her in husband-adoration, a tallish lady, slender-waisted and in her enriched are intellect, 
character and conduct... how can she be left off for your sake?' This is the innuendo of Lakshmana's 
wording. Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 12: "Oh, best complexioned one with best waist, is there any wiseacre to simply discard your kind of best 
personality, indeed, in preference to human females?" Lakshmana said so to Shuurpanakha. [3-18-12]

Shlok 13: Thus said by Lakshmana that despicable one with slouching stomach Shuurpanakha presumed those words 
to be truthful, for she is equivocal of that equivoque. [3-18-13]

Shlok 14: She who is fuddle by lust said to that unassailable enemy scorcher Rama who is sitting in the cottage 
along with Seetha. [3-18-14]

Shlok 15: "Tenacious of her who is disfigured, dishonest, diabolical, hallow-stomached old wife of yours you are 
not regarding me high. [3-18-15]

Shlok 16: "Now I wish to eat up this human female right before your very eyes, and then I can blithely make merry 
along with you, without the botheration of a co-wife." Said Shuurpanakha to Rama. [3-18-16]

Shlok 17: Speaking that way she that torch-eyed Shuurpanakha dashed towards the deer-eyed Seetha in high exasperation 
as a great meteor would dash towards Rohini, the brightest star in the sky. [3-18-17]

Shlok 18: By that the great-energetic Rama took umbrage and checking her who is like the noose of death swooping 
down on Seetha said to Lakshmana. [3-18-18]

Shlok 19: "Punning in any way with the base and brutish is inapposite, oh, gentle Saumitri, mark note of Vaidehi, 
somehow surviving  [3-18-19]

Shlok 20: "She is freakish, knavish and overtly ruttish, oh, tigerly man, it will be apt of you to deface this 
paunchy demoness " Thus Rama said to Lakshmana. [3-18-20]

Shlok 21: Thus said to that mighty Lakshmana he infuriately drew sword and chopped off her ears and nose before 
the very eyes of Rama. [3-18-21]

Shlok 22: On hewing off her ears and nose she that ghastly Shuurpanakha blared highly and discordantly, and very 
speedily fled into forest as she came. [3-18-22]

Shlok 23: She that very ghastly demoness when defaced is wetted by blood and blared many a blare like a cloud 
in cloudburst. [3-18-23]

Shlok 24: She that gruesome one in her appearance clasped herself and thunderously entered similarly gruesome 
forest while her blood fountained and profusely exuded. [3-18-24]

Shlok 25: Then she who is deformed neared her brother Khara who possess violent vigour, who is abiding in Janasthaana 
and who is presently surrounded by his band of his hench-demons, and before him she that Shuurpanakha 
fell onto ground like a thunderbolt from the sky. [3-18-25]

Shlok 26: Then that sister of Khara who is convulsed in the fluster of fear and her body wetted with blood reported 
to her brother Khara, all about Rama's arrival in forest with his wife and Lakshmana, and even about 
his misshaping her. [3-18-26]



SARGA 19
------------------------------

[Text] Shuurpanakha narrates her woeful story to her brother Khara ncriminating Seetha in particular. She wants 
Khara to wage a war so that she could drink Seetha's blood. Khara in order to appease his sister sends 
fourteen demons to eliminate Rama.

Shlok 1: On seeing her who fell before him in a misshapen and blood-soaked condition, demon Khara is all stewed 
up and asked her. [3-19-1]

Shlok 2: "Rise up, first tell me clearly putting away your flurry and fluster, who disfigured your form in this 
way. [3-19-2]

Shlok 3: "Who for sport is poking his fingertip at a venomously fanged black-cobra that has chanced in his close 
proximity but slouching down inoffensively. [3-19-3]

Shlok 4: "Who on harrowing you is now heedless about his gulping a deadly poison, or about his foolish bracing 
the noose of Time around his own neck. [3-19-4]

Shlok 5: "You are gifted with boldness and braveness, a whimsical rover, a guise changer by your wish, a coequal 
of Terminator, but to whom you have gone and by whom you are led into this kind of plight. [3-19-5]

Shlok 6: "Who is that kind of highly intrepid warper, either from gods, or from celestials or from high-souled 
sages who indeed rendered you shapeless. [3-19-6]

Shlok 7: "Indeed, I do not find anyone who causes displeasure to me in this world, even among divinities including 
the thousand eyed Indra, the controller of demon Paaka. [3-19-7]

Shlok 8: "Now, I will take away the lives of that miscreant with my arrows that are terminators of lives, as 
a swan would drink milk to dregs even if it is mingled in water, duly separating milk from water. [3-19-8]

Shlok 9: "Whose frothy blood is it that the earth wishes to quaff when I cut off his crucial organs by my arrows 
and drop him dead in a combat. [3-19-9]

Shlok 10: "Whose body is it from which birds pressing round gladly wish to wring flesh to pieces for eating when 
I slay him in war. [3-19-10]

Shlok 11: "Now, when I haul him easily on the ground in a battle that villain will be unredeemable either by gods, 
celestials, evil spirits, or by demons. [3-19-11]

Shlok 12: "It will be apt of you to gather your sensitivity slowly and tell me as to which miscreant attacked 
and worsted you in the forest." Thus Khara spoke to Shuurpanakha. [3-19-12]

Shlok 13: On hearing this kind of words of her brother, especially who is rancorous, then Shuurpanakha spoke these 
words, tearfully. [3-19-13]

Shlok 14- 15: "Those two are in adulthood, good-looking, gentle yet greatly mighty, eyes broad like lotuses, dressed 
in jute-cloths and deerskin, subsistent on fruits and tubers, composed, sagacious and celibate, and 
they are the sons of Dasharatha, namely Rama and Lakshmana. [3-19-14,15]

[Commentary] Here, when asked by Khara 'who mutilated you?' Shuurpanakha should have normally reported that, 'sons 
of some king Dasharatha namely Rama and Lakshmana did this' But not telling so she starts her narration 
with an odd appreciation of Rama's aspects. Some of them are as below:



taruNau ruupa sampannau Though they scarred her on her nose and ears she did not loose her 
heart for them. This taruNau ruupa sampannau is in accordance with Rama's aspect which will 
be sadaiva priya darshanaH   'the same pleasant persona at any time' as in Bala Kanda at 1-1-16, 
as said by Sage Narada to Valmiki. This is the same situation with Hanuma when Seetha asks him to indicate 
some aspects of Rama so as to believe Hanuma. There Hanuma starts with raamaH kamala patra akshaH 
sarva sattva manoharaH - sundara 35-8. 'Rama is lotus-petal eyed one' Further people in sleep, 
intoxicated or infuriated conditions, will speak their heart supramatta kupitaanaam bhaava j~naanam 
dR^iSTaH So Shuurpanakha who is also in a sleep like daze, she came out with her soulful feelings 
about Rama.



This narration has threefold meaning. 1] Through the eyes of a lustful female; 2] To belittle Rama and 
Lakshmana's prowess only to extol Kara's pride; 3] To deride Khara's valour so that he gets incited 
to fight Rama and Lakshmana.



taruNau 'came of age.' kanyaam varayate ruupam Women's first criterion towards a man 
is age. But this wording is in dwivacana 'in duel number' so it belongs to both Rama and Lakshmana. 
Then the question comes 'is she leaning towards both of them?' Yes. She makes eyes at both. First she 
approached Rama, but he advised her to approach Lakshmana. Lakshmana in turn advises her to approach 
Rama, thus she got interest in both. This is as per anyonya sadR^ishau viirau   'those darers 
are similar to one another.' Rama and Lakshmana may be different among themselves, but to the onlookers 
they appear as one reality. Further, she has hate-thinking for both of them also. She says that 'this 
situation occurred due to both of them' as at 3-19-18. How can she fall after both at a time? She can, 
with 'either-or-single-or-both' syndrome because she is a demoness, and unseen are such brothers with 
their glorious aspects, so far by her.



ruupa sampannau 'their aspects are ravishing' The syndrome is that angaat angaat sambhavasi 
'offshoots derive parent's aspects.' So Manmatha, the Love-God derived all his aspects from Vishnu. 
Then it is imaginable how much more that Vishnu might be in his lovely aspect. So Rama is with niratishaya 
ruupa samR^iddhi   'sublime features, endowed with' that which can be borrowed even by Manmatha.



sukumaarau 'delicate' like flowers. Rama is said to equal a delicate flower. asiita puSpa 
samkaasham Rama's body itself is a flower that which can be cherished by all. Or su 
= excellent;
ku =of earth; maarau = Manmatha-s' 'two Manmatha-s on earth' Manmatha, is only one 
god of love and without any form or body parts, but these two are having excellent forms and are evident 
on earth before eyes as per the attribute of kandarpa iva muurtimaan 'he has a form like that 
of Love-god'



Then her bother Khara may ask 'then why we demons shall hanker after some flimsy, fragile, feeble creatures?' 
For that she says mahaa balau 'greatly vigorous.' They have un-depleting vigour of manhood, 
which is what required by an aged demoness.



puNDariika vishaala akshau 'white-lotus, broad, eyed' 'Their eyes are not like ours while our 
eyes are samrakta nayanaa ghoraa 'bloodshot eyes of terrible look'



Or, unlike tamo guNa udreka 'ever persisting with stolid constituent of nature' and unlike
rajo guNodreka 'ever energetic with sprightly constituent of nature' -- their eyes are 
sattva guNa sampanna 'serene with the pure constituent of nature' Though Rama says that he 
aatmaanaam maanuSyam manye 'in my soul I consider I am human' but as per shruti / scripture,
yathaakapyaasam puNDariikam evam akshiNii 'though his outward aspect is hiding his real Being, 
his eyes are telling the truth of His supernal nature', hence Rama is other-worldly.



Or his white broad eyes are comparable with kshiira samudra Milky-ocean, his abode, with its 
unfathomable depths, so is his heart.



Or mahaa balau puNDariika vishaala akshau 'Great mighty and white broad eyed ones' who by their 
great might annihilate vice and if the evildoer submits himself, their white eyes alone give salvation 
with a broad-mind. sukumaarau puNDariika vishaala akshau 'Manmatha-like, white, broad eyed'



If it is said that these two are Love-gods on earth, then it may be asked 'where are the flowery arrows of that 
Love-god to these two?' But the arrows of these earthly Love-gods are their eyes and glances. The 
lotus is but one among the five arrows of Manmatha. Even Seetha under her direly distressed situation 
in Lanka says that 'gods, celestials, great-souls et al are sanctified with the look of this lotus-petal 
eyed one' dhanyaa devaaH sa gandhavaaH siddhaaH ca paramarSyaH | mama pashyanti ye naadhama raamam 
raajiiva locanam || sundara 26-41. This verse takes its place in gayatri ramayaNa as its 
14th verse out of total 27 verses.



Further they are excelling only by their nature but not by their dressings and outfits for they are 
just clad in ciira kR^ishNa ajina dharau 'jute-cloths, deerskin wearers of' Mahaakavi Kalidasa 
says in his abhij~naana shaakuntalam: says iyam [shakuntala] adhika manoj~naa valkalena api 
tanvii that, 'this Shakuntala is pleasant though clad in jute-cloths' kimavahi madhuraaNaam 
maNDananam na akR^itiinaam 'nothing can beautify beautiful people' etc. Though not adorned by any 
extra special ornamentation they by their nature are attractive, as discerned by sages at 3-1-13 of 
Aranya Kanda ruupa samhanam lakshmiim saukumaarya suveSatam as well by this Shuurpanakha or 
even by Ravana in part II of Yuddha Kanda, in 99th chapter 12th verse, who also extols these lotus eyes 
and the aspect of Rama on his first sight at Rama as padma patra vishaala aksham diirgha baahum 
arindamam



Should Khara ask in fear 'who is that great-mighty one who mutilated a sister of a great demon like 
me? Thereby my fear is growing about my own existence.' Then Shuurpanakha's reply is like this, in 
order to remove Khara's fear of Rama:



taruNau  'youngsters, boys' for his own father Dasharatha tells Vishvamitra that these are
uuna Sodasha varshau; na yuddha yogyatam asya apashyaami in Bala Kanda. Shuurpanakha that way 
tells Khara 'brother Khara... these two Rama and Lakshmana are boyish you need not care them, ' Further
yauvane viSayaisiNaam 'boys in young age bother more for enjoymentÃ¯ -- they are bothered to 
enjoy life and are not yet fit for a war, so you can war with them'



ruupa sampannau 'just by getups they are brilliant, but lack in courage to confront you'
kanyaa kaamayet ruupam 'girls cherish charming ones' 'They fall after girls only with their 
charming aspects that are unworthy to withstand war, so you can war with them'



sukumaarau 'delicate or fragile, or flimsy,' because they are sons of some king, grown up in 
palace chambers, unlike us who grow in ravines; and they eat nonsensically delectable food, unlike us 
who happily eat raw-flesh. So, wherefrom they can tolerate your bloodshot glances, let alone your arrows...'



mahaa.abalu = mahaa + a + balau   'very, without, strength; very weak fellows';



furthermore mahaa abalau; 
mahatii rakshaNiiyaa abalaa yayostu 'a lady, namely Seetha, is to be protected by them. She has 
become a string fastened around their necks. Then how do they, the sentinels of a woman, can fight you...'



puNDariika vishalaa akshau 'paled, broadened, eyed' 'Their eyes paled and wide-open awaiting 
the results of their scarring my nose and ears, and their eyes popped up in daze, then what can they 
do to you...'



Then Khara may ask, "it is good you have said that they are hapless etc., but they may now muster up 
some army and fight me back then what?'



For this she says, ciira kR^ishNa ajina dharau 'wearers 
of jute-cloths and deerskin' And furthering her argument she says, 'how can they afford an army for 
they themselves have nothing special to wear. That too one of those items, namely the jute-cloth, is 
begged from a tree that is sessile, and the other, the deerskin, is begged from a deer, that is mobile.  They themselves 
are shuttling in between mobile and sessile how can they confront you.'



Further, this god, say this 
Rama, has no other special work or duty, except shuttling between mobile or sessile beings or matter, 
begging their produce, and beg them to recognise him.



Her words also extol the capabilities of Rama and Lakshmana in warring and said to have addressed Khara 
this way in order to enhance his self-pride.



tarunau; yauvane vijigiisuNaam 'youthful ones 
are interested in triumphs' 'Because they are the seekers of triumphs, they will definitely triumph 
over you, you better do not go there and get defeated'



ruupa sampannau; ruupyate anena; asaadhaaraNa niratishaya ruupa visheSatvaat 'with an unimaginable 
stance' They are known for their stance from their childhood in eliminating Tataka, Subaahu etc.,
gatvaa saumitri sahito naa vijitya ivartate 'on going with Lakshmana, he [Rama] does not return 
without conquering' yashasaH ca eka bhaajanam : Tara in Kishkindha, 14-20. 'for glory [Rama 
is] the only resort.' 'So many praises are said about them and hence they fight you out, better do not go'



If Khara asks, 'how can they fight me, such a mighty one?'



For this she says, sukumaarau 'they 
are dextrous' 'with their dexterity they easily eliminate you'



mahaa balau 'greatly mighty' 'Rama is mightily by his shoulder-strength' and also by the use 
of mahat shabda his might is by his tenacity of mind and ideation to eliminate foes. Or 
mahaa balau 'greatly sturdy.' Though he wars for a long his vigour does not deplete for he uses 
two vidya-s: bala, atibala 'by the twin principles taught by Vishvamitra his strength does 
not deplete.



puNDariika vishaala akshau 'white-lotus, broad, eyed' His broad white-lotus like eyes does 
neither contract in anger nor expand in exclamation, as usually happen to anyone who sees an object 
of interest with unnecessary widening of eyes priiti visphaarita iikshaNam



Next if it be asked 'are they ready for a fight' for which she says 'they are already clad in ciira 
kR^ishNa ajina dharau 'jute-cloth, deerskin, clad in' They have tightened their girdle-cloths and 
are armoured in shield like deerskin. Further they also have arrows and knives with which I am scarred 
so better not to go there and get your throat slit like my nose and ears, for you are a shameless, incapable 
demon still sitting here as I go on narrating the incident like a story'

Shlok 16: "Having all the aspects 
of kings they equal the kings of gandharva celestials, and I am ill-disposed to differentiate whether 
they two are gods or demons. [3-19-16]

[Commentary] Some mms have this daanavau 
demons as maanuSau, humans. While Khara, sending his demons to eliminate the brothers, says 
that they are just humans as at verse 22 in this chapter itself. So Shuurpanakha evasively told a lie 
to his brother that she could not distinguish between their own race and that of others. Khara for his 
part believes that neither demons nor gods can hurt his race.

Shlok 17: " I have seen a curvaceous 
lady between those two, a ripely beauty, rich in comeliness, adorned with lots of ornaments. [3-19-17]

[Commentary] She is baiting Khara with 
the beauty of Seetha. But this does not incite Khara like Ravana. She also plays the same card there 
with Ravana after the failure of this Khara and other brothers.

Shlok 18: "Owing to that woman I am 
led into this sort of situation, together by those two, as with an insecure female. [3-19-18]

[Commentary] The escapist words may be 
observed. She is not telling that she alone went to eat away Seetha, but she is holding Seetha responsible 
for all this and she is evasive to show any action of Seetha as the cause of trouble. She is simply 
twisting the episode towards her side.

Shlok 19: "Staying in the van of war 
I wish to drink the frothy blood of that guileful Seetha along with that of those two, Rama and Lakshmana, 
when they are killed in war. [3-19-19]

Shlok 20: "I shall drink her blood 
and also that of those two in war, this being my prime longing let it be fulfilled by you." Thus wailed 
Shuurpanakha before her brother Khara. [3-19-20]

Shlok 21: While she is saying like 
that Khara vengefully summoned fourteen great mighty demons that are similar to the Terminator. [3-19-21]

Shlok 22: "Wielding weapons and wearing 
jute-cloths and deerskin two humans have got into ghastly forest of Dandaka along with a woman of age." 
Thus Khara is ordering the fourteen demons. [3-19-22]

Shlok 23: "You shall return to me only on killing those two and also that 
treacherous woman, and their blood this sister of mine will drink. [3-19-23]

Shlok 24: "Oh, demons, on going there swiftly stamp them out by you own 
vigour, thus let the fanciful hearty desire of my sister be achieved. [3-19-24]

[Commentary] On these 23, 24 verses Maheshvara Tiirtha says: iyam bhaginii 
'this my sister' pramathya 'killing me' mama rudhiram paasyati 'my blood she drinks'
teSaam [samiipam gatvaa] to them, you nearing' sva tejasaa shiighreNa 'by your own 
valour, quickly' tau to them Rama and Lakshmana; dur vR^ittaam Seetha of impossible, 
behaviour [to be followed by others]; hatvaa; hana himsaa gatyoH knowing her: because hana 
indicates 'knowing also; so you know that Seetha, meaning 'be absolved by her' apaavartitum arhatha 
'return, you may' to heavens, as all these demons are celestials earlier to their curse.

Shlok 25: "On seeing your finishing those two brothers flatly in a war she 
this sister of mine will be gladdened, and then she drinks their blood in war, amusingly. [3-19-25]

[Commentary] This sister of mine would like to drink my blood. So you go to 
Rama and Lakshmana and then know that Seetha, who has an impossible behaviour. And be absolved by her 
for all of our sins. And then you may return. Not to Khara but their return is to heavens. The endnote 
may please be seen. Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 26: In this way when Khara ordered those fourteen demons, they have 
gone to Panchavati along with Shuurpanakha like black-clouds glided by gales. [3-19-26]

Shlok 27: But then, though the nightwalker wielding sharp arrows have become 
ineffectual to trounce Rama like the wild elephants which will become ineffectual to overcome the blazingly 
uprising wildfire. [3-19-27]

[Commentary] This last verse is mismatching with the episode. This is not found 
in some publications of Gorakhpur versions but found in others and even in the Eastern recension. The 
import of this verse is that though the demons have gone to Rama but they could not assault him, which 
actually happens in next episode. However this verse is also included here as per the text of Chaukambha 
Vidyaa Bhavan, Ksashi, and according to Eastern recension.



Maheshvara Tiirtha notes 
that God Shiva cursed Khara and pardoned saying that he will be released from curse by Rama of Dasharatha.
tasmaadyaH 
kruura ruupeNa dehena harataa amR^itam | viShNur daasharathir bhuutvaa mokShayiShyati suvrata | 
In the sheSa dharma of Maha Bharata in the discourse between Bhiishma and Yudhistira it is 
said that sage Yajnavalkya has three sons. They are Chandrakanta, Mahaamedha and Vijaya. These three 
Brahmans became Khara, Duushana, and Trishira by the curse of Shiva. The first one Chandrakanta is Khara. 
And the disciples of the three Brahman scholars are fourteen and they also became Brahma-demons, who 
are now being sent. On listening Shuurpanakha Khara came to know that Vishnu arrived in the form of 
Rama and thus Khara wanted to get release from the curse by Rama, and hence firstly he sends the fourteen 
demon-disciples, and later he and his brother also follow the suit.



SARGA 20
------------------------------

[Text] The fourteen demons arrive at Rama's cottage guided by Shuurpanakha and they wage a war with Rama in 
which Rama destructs all their weaponry and eliminates them all. Seeing this defeat Shuurpanakha rushes 
back to her brother to report the defeat.

Shlok 1: Then on arriving at Raghava's hermitage that ghastly Shuurpanakha has shown the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, 
along with Seetha to the fourteen demons. [3-20-1]

Shlok 2: They have seen the great-mighty Rama seated in the thatched cottage along with Seetha and Lakshmana 
attending to him. [3-20-2]

Shlok 3: On seeing the arrival of the demons, and the demoness Shuurpanakha too, that magnificent Rama of Raghava 
dynasty said to the radiantly brilliant Lakshmana. [3-20-3]

Shlok 4: "Oh, Soumitri, briefly tarry at the close of Seetha as I wish to eliminate these demons who have trailed 
the path of that demoness to here. [3-20-4]

Shlok 5: On hearing that word of Rama, then the nimble-souled Lakshmana honoured the word of Rama saying "so 
be it." [3-20-5]

Shlok 6: On taking up his awful bow that is decorated with gold Raghava stringed it with bowstring and even spoke 
the demons as a forewarning. [3-20-6]

Shlok 7: "We the sons of Dasharatha are brothers named Rama and Lakshmana, and we entered the impenetrable forests 
Dandaka along with Seetha. [3-20-7]

Shlok 8: "We the dispassionate subsist on fruits and tubers treading in the path of virtue, and we being the 
sages resident in Dandaka forest what for you outrage us. [3-20-8]

Shlok 9: "As assigned by the sages I chanced here with bow and arrows to decimate you evil-souled and unrighteous 
beings in a crucial clash. [3-20-9]

Shlok 10: "Stay there obligingly or you should not be able to return, else if you desire your lives, oh, nightwalkers, 
you may return now. [3-20-10]

Shlok 11- 12: On hearing that sentence of Rama they the fourteen ghoulish demons who are the slayers of Brahmans and 
handlers of spears have become highly infuriated, and they with their bloodshot eyes and with harsh 
words said these words to Rama, whose eyes are with blood streaks at their ends, and who also is a sweet 
talker, and whose valour is yet unseen by those fourteen demons. [3-20-11, 12]

Shlok 13: "Killed in conflict by us you alone will set your lives loose as an inciter of fury in our highly great 
souled lord Khara. [3-20-13]

Shlok 14: "Indeed, what capability you have as a lone one to stand against many of us in the forefront of war, 
and why tell again about your battling ability in a given battle. [3-20-14]

Shlok 15: "When we launch maces, spears and swords by our might you will forgo your lives, mettle, and even the 
bow now clasped in your hand." So said the demons to Rama. [3-20-15]

[Commentary] For the three verses the above meaning is the textual meaning. For them there is another import.



su mahaatmanaH oh, Supreme Person; bhartR^iH kharasya 
our lord, to Khara; krodham utpaadya anger, infusing; asmaabhiH hataH tvam praaNaan na 
haasyase eva by us, killed, you, Spirits, not, leaves, thus...



"Oh! Supreme Person, we have come here because you incited anger 
in our lord Khara, and by us killed will you let go your lives, mettle and spirits? No. Never it will 
happen."



The reason for not happening of that event is explained: raNa 
muurdhan in war's, van; ekasya te agrataH sthaatum lone one, you, before, to stand;
bahuunaam asmaakam api many, we are, though; kaa shaktiH where is, capability for 
us



"Though you are a lone being, and we are many, where is the capability 
for us to stand before you in the van of war?"



Thus they say that they have come only at the behest of their 
lord but not to kill Rama. baahuH yuktaiH parighaiH shuula paTTisaiH upalakshitaanaam though 
equipped with our paraphernalia like maces, spears, swords etc., adhyaahaara: asmaakam our;
praaNaan viiryam tyakshasi lives, vitality, we loose; ehi come... give us salvation.



"Though we are equipped with much paraphernalia like maces, spears, 
swords etc., we lose our lives and vitality at your hand, so come on, take them away, and accord salvation 
and release from our curse. It is better to die at your hand than returning to Khara and dying a merciless 
death at the hand of Khara.



It may be remembered that these fourteen are the cursed Vedic-scholarly 
disciples of Chandrakanta, now in an accursed form namely Khara and other demons. Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 16- 17a: Thus saying that way clamorously they the fourteen demons, upraising their weapons they unhesitatingly 
rushed towards Rama alone, and they hurled lances towards that unconquerable Raghava. [3-20-16, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18a: Rama in turn shredded all of those fourteen lances only with as many arrows that are adorned in gold. 
[3-20-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: Next that great resplendent Rama in high wrath took up fourteen iron bolt like arrows that are whetted 
on whetstone and equalling the sun in their dazzle. [3-20-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: Then Raghava took up his bow, arched it, and aiming at the targeted demons released arrows as Indra 
would release his Thunderbolts. [3-20-19b, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: And by the force of their speed those arrows gored the chests of those demons, and then on coming out 
bedaubed with blood they swiftly penetrated into earth like snakes into snake pit. [3-20-20b, 21a]

Shlok 21b- 22a: Those arrows bursting their hearts they are blood bathed, mangled, and utterly dead, and like the uprooted 
trees they fell onto the ground. [3-20-21b, 22a]

Shlok 22: On seeing the demons falling onto ground that demoness Shuurpanakha is convulsed in rage, and she with 
a blanched aspect returned to the near of Khara in an agonising manner like a creeper exuding resin 
on incision, and fell before him as before. [3-20-22b, 23]

Shlok 24: Then she in the presence of her brother Khara discharged a great outcry, and with a bloodless face she 
spilled tears attuning the strains of a whiner. [3-20-24]

Shlok 25: Shuurpanakha having seen the fall of demons quickly fled from Panchavati of Rama to trikanTaka, the 
capital of Khara, and she being the sister of Khara she reported to Khara all about the destruction 
of those demons, in its entirety. [3-20-25]



SARGA 21
------------------------------

[Text] Shuurpanakha comes again to her brother Khara to report that all the fourteen demons sent by him are 
slain by Rama. She persuades him to wage a war against Rama and Lakshmana and annihilate them for they 
intruded into Dandaka and there is every possibility of onslaught by them on demons.

Shlok 1: On seeing Shuurpanakha who came back only to wreck havoc on demonic race and again fell before him as 
before, Khara spoke this sentence to her in clear terms in all his fury. [3-21-1]

Shlok 2: "What for your are howling again when I have just now commanded those fearless flesh eating demons in 
order to fulfill your wish? [3-21-2]

Shlok 3: "Those demons are my admirers, adherers and they always remained my well-wishers, hence there is no 
question of their non-accomplishment of my orders. [3-21-3]

Shlok 4: "Owing to what you are highly bawling by saying, 'haa, lord' and wriggle on the ground like a snake? 
I would like to know the reason for all this, what is it? [3-21-4]

Shlok 5: "I am here to take care of you, then why should you really cry out like an uncared-for being, get up...get 
up, and ward off this sort of perplexity." Thus Khara said to Shuurpanakha. [3-21-5]

Shlok 6: She that Shuurpanakha who is otherwise an unassuageable one is wholly pacified when Khara spoke to her 
thus that way, and she on dabbing her tearful eyes then spoke to her brother Khara. [3-21-6]

Shlok 7: "I came to you just a while back with my ears and nose chopped off and wet with gushes of blood, and 
you too have comforted me, isn't it. [3-21-7]

Shlok 8: "Oh, valiant brother, for my delight you too have sent fourteen demons to eliminate that atrocious Rama 
along with Lakshmana, isn't it? [3-21-8]

Shlok 9: "But they all who handled their spears and bolts along with an envious anger are killed in a fight with 
Rama by his arrows that cleave the crucial parts of his opponents. [3-21-9]

Shlok 10: "On seeing those highly impetuous demons falling to earth in a trice, and even on seeing the unusual 
deed of Rama in felling them, I am highly alarmed. [3-21-10]

Shlok 11: "Oh me! I am alarmed, fully frenzied, and even despaired, oh, nightwalker Khara, and beholding dread 
everywhere again I have come seeking your refuge. [3-21-11]

Shlok 12: "Why do not you rescue me when I am drowned in a vast ocean called grief, wherein each pervasive crocodile 
is despair and each swelling wave is fright. [3-21-12]

Shlok 13: "Besides, those flesh-eating demons that have followed me are also felled by Rama with his sharp arrows, 
for whom I have a contrite heart. [3-21-13]

Shlok 14- 15a: "If you have mercy on me, and even on those dead demons, and if ability and animation are still left 
in you to cope with Rama, oh, nightwalker, kill that Rama who is a thorn in the side of demons dwelling 
in Dandaka forest. [3-21-14, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: "If you are not going to kill that enemy destroyer Rama now itself, I will give up my life unhesitatingly, 
that too in your fore, that too now itself.



If you are not going to kill that enemy destroyer Rama now itself, now itself I will give up my life 
than living a shameless life with these lopped ears and nose. [3-21-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17: "I can perceive instinctually that you are incapable of affronting Rama in a given crucial battle, even 
if your are with all your forces on the battlefield, and you assert yourself a valiant, but you are 
just vainglorious. [3-21-16b, 17]

Shlok 18- 19: "Kill those two, Rama and Lakshmana, as they are just humans, or else, if you are incapable of doing 
so, really what for is your stay here in Janasthaana with your trivial stamina and trifling sinews like 
a stupid blemishing his clan, then get out of this Janasthaana at once along with your hench-demons. 
[3-21-18, 19]

[Commentary] The order of the verses from 16 to the last varies with versions and verbatim meanings differ. This 
is a kind of intimidation Shuurpanakha hurling at Khara. Besides being her brothers, Khara, Trishira 
and Duushana are the provincial governors of Janasthaana, nominated by Ravana. If they do not come to 
the rescue of Shuurpanakha, or to that matter of fact should they not eliminate intruders into Janasthaana, 
there is every possibility of their ouster from their posts by Ravana, because Shuurpanakha has more 
access to Ravana.

Shlok 20: "You will completely and quickly evanish, indeed, subjugated by resplendence of Rama, for that Dasharatha's 
son Rama possess that kind of resplendence, in effect. [3-21-20]

Shlok 21- 22: "And, by whom I am misshapen that brother of Rama too is a highly vigorous one..." in this way on saying 
Shuurpanakha bawled variously in the presence of her brother, Khara, and then anguished by her own affliction 
that demoness with a cave like belly started hitting her paunch with both of her hands, and what is 
more, she swooned. [3-21-21, 22]

[Commentary] The name Khara also stands for a he-ass



SARGA 22
------------------------------

[Text] Khara, the brother of Shuurpanakha starts out to wage war with Rama with fourteen thousand demons and 
with their unusual arsenal. This is the first major move of demons towards Rama that leads to the ultimate 
battle at the end of epic.

Shlok 1: Thus when Shuurpanakha disparaged that valiant Khara amidst demons he is infuriated and spoke these 
highly hurtful words. [3-22-1]

Shlok 2: "This fury of mine originating from the disgrace brought on you is like the highly bitter salt water 
that is impossible to contain when ingested. [3-22-2]

Shlok 3: "I do not care the valour of that Rama for he is a human with dwindled lifetime, now going to give up 
his life slain by his own misdoings. [3-22-3]

Shlok 4: "Control your tears and cast off your despair too, for I will send Rama to the abode of the Terminator 
along with his brother. [3-22-4]

Shlok 5: "Now, you demoness, you will swill that Rama's red hot blood when that short-lived one is hewed down 
to earth with an axe." So Khara assured Shuurpanakha. [3-22-5]

Shlok 6: On hearing the words plunged from the mouth of Khara she is very much gladdened and in all her stupidity 
she further praised her brother highly saying, "you are the best among all the demons..." [3-22-6]

Shlok 7: Though she denounced him earlier she alone praised him now for which Khara is overjoyed, and then he 
ordered his army commander, namely Duushana. [3-22-7]

Shlok 8: "Those who are the followers of my will, whose hustle will be frightful and who will be unretreating 
in combats, such of those demons are there in fourteen thousand numbers, aren't they. [3-22-8]

Shlok 8: "And oh, gentle Duushana, those domineering demons are with dark-clouds like complexions, and they are 
the pamperers of genocide, as such, cause them for a belligerency, all at once. [3-22-9]

[Commentary] The very sight of these black cloud like demons will be murderous to humans, as Rama exclaimed about 
Tataka. If the on looking humans are not dead at first sight of these demons, then these demons can 
pamper in killing humans

Shlok 10: "For me, oh, gentle one, promptly position my chariot before me along with bows and arrows, amazing 
swords and diverse sharp power bolts. [3-22-10]

Shlok 11: "Oh, war pert Duushana, I wish to start ahead of all the demons of ours, who are the clans-demons of 
the great souled Paulastya, for the purpose of elimination of that evil-minded Rama." So said Khara 
to Duushana. [3-22-11]

[Commentary] For this Maheshvara Tiirtha says: raamasya 
agre paulastyaanaam raakShasaanaam vadhaartham niryaatum icchaami which gives meaning: 
"Before Rama I wish to present all the demonic clansmen of Sage Paulastya, for the purpose of elimination, 
for which I am starting ahead as a starter of this elimination process..."

Shlok 12: While Khara is saying thus Duushana heralded saying, "Here comes the great chariot with sun's dazzle, 
yoked with very good horses of variegated colours." [3-22-12]

Shlok 13- 14- 15: That chariot which has a roomy cabin with its rooftop like that of the ridge of Mt. Meru, body embellished 
in gold, wheels golden, gem-studded yoke-to-carriage shaft, all around encompassed with golden artefacts 
like fishes, flowers, trees, mountains, sun, moon, and auspicious birds flocks and stars, and even decorated 
with jingle-bells, endowed with flags, swords, and best horses, and such as it is, Khara embarked on 
it with all his rancour. [3-22-13, 14, 15]

Shlok 16: On overseeing that great army with chariots, skins shields, weaponry and flags, and even at Duushana 
too, Khara charged all those demons saying "proceed." [3-22-16]

Shlok 17: Then that demonic force with their ghoulish skin shields, weaponry and flags, issued forth from Janasthaana, 
blaring blatantly and foraying dashingly. [3-22-17]

Shlok 18: Wielding maces, dart-bolts, and spears, and also razor-sharp axes, swords and discs, and dreadful power-darts 
and power-bolts that are flashing, iron maces, unusual bows, clubs, scimitars and pounding-shafts, and 
even thunderbolt like weapons that are calamitous in look, that army which comprises fourteen thousand 
fiendish demons that are the followers of Khara's whim, has started from Janasthaana. [3-22-18, 19, 
20]

[Commentary] Earlier batch which was sent against Rama consisted fourteen demons and now it is an army of fourteen 
thousand demons.

Shlok 21: On seeing the outrush of those demons of diabolic appearance, then Khara's chariot also proceeded a 
little later at their behind. [3-22-21]

Shlok 22: Then the charioteer set spurs on those colourful horses that are adorned in polished gold according 
to the notions of Khara. [3-22-22]

Shlok 23: When the chariot of enemy destroyer Khara is driven that impetuously, it has started to swell earth's 
four cardinal quarters and inter-quarters with turbulence. [3-22-23]

Shlok 24: He whose voice is thunderous and whose rancour escalated speedily, and who is hastening forward like 
the Terminator intending to destroy his enemy, that Khara repeatedly hurried the charioteer shouting 
at him loudly like a overwhelming cloud that is going to storm stones. [3-22-24]



SARGA 23
------------------------------

[Text] On the starting out of Khara's demonic forces to wage a war with Rama, many bad omens are foreboded 
by vultures, animals, and even by nature. Though in the know of the portent evil, Khara proceeds with 
his army vaingloriously messaging his army that he can overcome these auguries or even Indra, and Rama 
is nothing before him.

Shlok 1: A massy and tumultuous ass-coloured cloud rained ill-omened bloody water while that fiendish force is 
advancing. [3-23-1]

Shlok 2: The highly speedy horses paired to Khara's chariot have tottered in a trice, even though that place 
on the highway is with even surface and spread with flowers. [3-23-2]

Shlok 3: Capturing the sun a blackish corona with blood-red outer circle has formed and nested around it 
like the fiery ring formed by circling a fireball. [3-23-3]

[Commentary] This sort of corona can be seen during the total eclipse of sun where a black corona with red tinged 
glow forms around the eclipsed sun. This circling of fireball handheld on a sling is there even today, 
and it is performed before marriage processions or such other events as a daring sport.

Shlok 4: Then, nearing the golden shaft of the flag of the chariot with a very lofty flagstaff, an awful eagle 
with massive body occupied and perched atop of that golden shaft. [3-23-4]

Shlok 5: Cacophonous and carnivorous predators and vultures took over the nearby places of Janasthaana and they 
made raucous sounds of many kinds. [3-23-5]

Shlok 6: Turning towards the stretch scorched by the sun, fearsome and loud noised jackals have howled emitting 
awful sounds, that which is inauspicious to the demons. [3-23-6]

Shlok 7: Then frightening clouds similar to bursting mountains carrying bloodlike water have rendered the firmament 
less of leeway. [3-23-7]

Shlok 8: There chanced an abominable, cataclysmic, hair-raising darkness whereby the milieus or inter-milieus 
are not very clearly brightened. [3-23-8]

Shlok 9- 10a: An untimely eventide glistened with a colour similar to the one drenched in blood, and then horrendous 
brutes and birds have clamoured facing Khara directly, and the vultures, jackals and eagles too have 
screamed portending danger. [3-23-9, 10a]

Shlok 10: Jackals, that too female jackals, are always the agents of inauspiciousness in wars with demonstrable 
calamities brought forth by their portending howling, and such jackals have now howled in front of Khara's 
army with their snouts spewing blazes. [3-23-10]

Shlok 11b- 12: A spherical object like that of a human trunk is revealed near at the sun, while the sun is rendered 
shineless as though Rahu, the great eclipsing-planet, has eclipsed him inopportunely, and the wind too 
whirled frantically. [3-23-11b, 12]

Shlok 13- 14a: Stars sprang up with the brilliance of fireflies though it is not night, and at that moment fishes and 
waterfowls stood still in lakes, lotuses have dried up, flowers and fruits have dropped from trees as 
though it is night. [3-23-13, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: Without any puffing of wind dust in brownish-red colour is heaved up, and there the songbirds like Maina 
started to twitter as 'cii cii kuu cii'. [3-23-14b, 15a]

[Commentary] The expression cii cii kuu cii is an onomatopoetic expression for the twittering of birds.

Shlok 15b- 16a: Meteors horrible in their look have fallen down thunderously, and even the earth together with its mountains, 
woods and forests quaked shakily. [3-23-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: He who is raving while sitting in his chariot that clever Khara's left shoulder thrilled excessively, 
and his voice too quavered. [3-23-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18a: While he is seeing everywhere his eyes spawned tears for no good reason, his forehead ached, but he 
did not retrace his steps owing to his own vanity. [3-23-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: On observing those worst auguries stemming up at that moment with hair-raising nature, Khara laughed 
them off and said this to all of the demons. [3-23-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: "These awful auguries with their horrible nature have arisen, but owing to my own valour I am unbothered 
about all of them as with a mighty one unworried of the mightless. [3-23-19b, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: "With the excruciating arrows of mine I can hurtle stars from the face of sky, and if highly infuriated, 
I can even enjoin mortality to Death himself. [3-23-20b, 21a]

Shlok 21b- 22a: "I am reluctant to return without killing that Rama, a haughty one by his might, together with his brother 
Lakshmana, with my incisive arrows. [3-23-21b, 22a]

Shlok 22b- 23a: "In whose respect both Rama and Lakshmana behaved perversely, let that sister of mine be contented in 
drinking the blood of those two. [3-23-22b, 23a]

Shlok 23b- 24a: "No defeat has chanced on me in combats at anytime and anywhere, that to you all is obvious and I tell 
no untruth. [3-23-23b, 24a]

Shlok 24b- 25a: "If I am infuriated I can eliminate even the king of gods, wielder of Thunderbolt and a trekker on ruttish 
elephant Iravata, namely Indra in a war, then why talk about these two humans." Thus Khara addressed 
his troops. [3-23-24b, 25a]

Shlok 25b- 26a: On hearing that thundering speech of Khara that sizeable army of demons which is tied down by the noose 
of death obtained an incomparable rejoice. [3-23-25b, 26a]

Shlok 26b- 27a: Then desiring to see the war of Khara with Rama, great-souls like sages, gods, gandharva-s along with 
carana-s and siddha-s have come together in firmament. [3-23-26b, 27a]

Shlok 27b- 28a: On gathering at a place those great souls met one another and said, "let good betide cows, Brahmans 
and those that are held respectful by the people at large." [3-23-27b, 28a]

Shlok 28: "Let Raghava triumph over these mighty night walkers from the lineage of Pulastya, as with Vishnu who 
once conquered all the mighty demons in war." So said celestials to one another. [3-23-28]

Shlok 29: While the great sages are speaking about this and many other topics, they and the gods abiding in their 
aircrafts have inquisitively seen the flow of army of demons, whose longevity is now beyond hope. [3-23-29, 
30]

Shlok 31: Khara speedily bolted in his chariot to the van of his legions, and on seeing that demon Khara going 
in front other important demons too rushed to fore. They are Shyenagaami, Prithugviira, Yajnashatru, 
Vihamgama and also Durjaya, Karaviiraaksha, Parusha, Kaalakaarmuka, Hemamaali, Mahaamaali, Sarpaasya, 
Rudhiraaksha. These twelve highly valorous demons cruised in a semicircle around Khara. [3-23-31]

Shlok 33: Likewsie Mahakapaala, Stuulaaksha, Pramaathii, Trishira are the four commanders of demonic forces and 
they followed Duushana marching at his behind. [3-23-33]

Shlok 34: That army of valiant demons which is highly execrable, infernally speedy, and readily inspirited for 
a battle quickly rushed towards those two princes, Rama and Lakshmana, as though a festoon of planets 
would rush towards the Moon and Sun so as to put them to rout. [3-23-34]



SARGA 24
------------------------------

[Text] Rama perceives good omens of victory, but to safeguard Seetha he sends her away with Lakshmana to take 
shelter in a mountain's cave till the war is over. Then he adopts a furious nature to annihilate demons. 
Gods and divinities watch from heavens as to how a war can occur between one against fourteen thousand 
demons.

Shlok 1: While fiercely valorous Khara proceeded towards Rama's hermitage, Rama along with his brother Lakshmana 
has indeed seen the very same auguries which have earlier appeared to Khara. [3-24-1]

Shlok 2: On looking at those very gruesomely bad omens, and perceiving them to be unpropitious to people, Rama 
spoke this sentence to Lakshmana. [3-24-2]

Shlok 3: "Oh, dextrous Lakshmana, for the complete elimination of all the demons these great indications have 
arisen, as though betokening the annihilation of all beings. See them. [3-24-3]

Shlok 4: "On their part these clouds are hovering on the sky with stark reddish-grey tint, thunderously braying 
and copiously showering streams of blood. [3-24-4]

Shlok 5: "All my arrows too are incensed to fuming in an ecstasy towards a war, and dorsally gold-plated bows 
of mine are incessantly spurring to hook up those arrows, telling apart the impeding conflict. [3-24-5]

Shlok 6: "Judging by the kind of wild birds that are shrieking here, danger is up ahead and coming upon us, along 
with uncertainty of our lives. [3-24-6]

Shlok 7- 8: "This right hand of mine is indicating by its repeated throbbing that a critical and riotous conflict 
is going to occur, no doubt, but oh brave one, our victory and defeat to the enemies are also in vicinity, 
and for sure, your face is also appearing brightish and aglow, which itself is a good omen. [3-24-8] 
[3-24-7, 8]

Shlok 9: "If the faces of those that are poised for a conflict loose lustre, deem that the death is looming large 
on their longevity too. [3-24-9]

Shlok 10: "This nasty noise which we hear pertains to the uproar of demons, and even to the drumming of war drums 
by the demons of fiendish activities, and this is ear-splitting. [3-24-10]

Shlok 11: "Preventive measures are to be effectuated for any imminent situation by any well-wishing person, or 
by a person with misgivings about a danger, or by a person of talent. [3-24-11]

[Commentary] The meaning can otherwise be rendered as: 'If any misgivings are caused by an imminent danger a well-wisher 
and intellectual person shall effectuate preventive measures...' but this becomes more self-centred 
and cannot become a maxim or axiom.

Shlok 12: "Hence, wield your bow, keep arrows ready at hand, and taking Vaidehi with you seek shelter in a impassable 
cave of a mountain overgrown with trees. [3-24-12]

Shlok 13: "I wish you to gainsay me for this word of mine, my boy, have honour on my feet and be gone not before 
long. [3-24-13]

Shlok 14: "You are a stalwart, a forceful one, and for sure you can eliminate them all, it is doubtless, but I 
long to eliminate all of the nightwalkers, personally" Rama said thus to Lakshmana. [3-24-14]

Shlok 15: When Rama said to him that way, Lakshmana picked up his bow and arrows, and together with Seetha he 
took shelter in an unreachable cave. [3-24-15]

[Commentary] This episode of sending away Seetha and Lakshmana has got three reasons in the complex of She-He-Me. 
1] One is that this Seetha is to be sent away from that prospective battlefield, because Seetha is untrained 
for warfare like Rama's third mother Kaikeyi. Secondly, whenever Seetha is present we see no killings 
or slayings in Ramayana, because she, as Goddess Lakshmi, condones any sinner and accords salvation. 
As such, there may be a probability of not only hindering war, but there may be her blessing to every 
demon with a free passage to heaven, of which Rama becomes a helpless onlooker. 2] Second reason is 
that this Lakshmana is intolerant of any assault on his brother or sister-in-law and colloids head-on 
with the aggressors, which may lead Lakshmana up to Lanka to confront even Ravana. That being the snakily 
aggressive nature of Lakshmana, Rama bids him to go away before any happening, or any further dialogue 
is given to Lakshmana. 3] Third is that Rama is the first one to promise the sages and saints to eradicate 
demons for himself, for which Seetha nags him not to wage a causeless war. Therefore, if Rama is going 
to hide in any cave camouflaged by trees along with Seetha, and Lakshmana goes on warring, the very 
character of Rama is at stake. Thus, as promised to sages and saints Rama alone wanted to trigger off 
the elimination process of demons. That is why Rama breathes fresh air saying "good riddance" in next 
verse.

Shlok 16: On Lakshmana's entering into cave along with Seetha, Rama said to himself, "thank goodness, it is a 
good-idea!" and thus saying he donned his shield. [3-24-16]

Shlok 17: Well bedecked in a shield that has fire-like brilliance that Rama shone forth like a fumeless conflagration 
up-shot in utter darkness. [3-24-17]

Shlok 18: On raising his imposing bow and drawing arrows, that valorous Rama firmed up and stood there, filling 
all the directions with the tinny sounds of bowstring. [3-24-18]

Shlok 19: Gods with gandharva-s and great-souled siddha-s along with carana-s have then met one another and came 
there aspiring to see the war. [3-24-19]

Shlok 20: The great-souled sages and those that are known in worlds as eminent Brahma-sages, on their coming together 
those beings of pious exploits spoke to one another, among themselves. [3-24-20]

Shlok 21- 22a: "Let good betide cows, Brahmans and those people that are abiding in all the worlds. Raghava shall be 
victorious in the war over the clansmen of Sage Paulastya, the nightwalkers." Thus they talked among 
themselves. [3-24-21]

Shlok 22b- 23: Thus speaking they also well-said again, looking at each other "the demons of fiendish deeds are fourteen 
thousand in number and this virtue-souled Rama is solitary... what would be the result of this war!" 
Thus the sages discussed among themselves. [3-24-22b, 23]

Shlok 24: Thus the assemblages of kingly-sages, siddha-s and the eminent Brahmans, along with gods that are staying 
in their aircrafts, tarried there in the firmament peering inquisitively at Rama. [3-24-24]

Shlok 25: Immured in an aura of invincibility Rama is standing up to the war in its vanguard, and then on seeing 
at him all beings went into the throes of dread. [3-24-25]

Shlok 26: That nonesuch aspect of Rama whose deeds are unharmful to any, has become the aspect of wrathful supreme-souled 
Rudra. [3-24-26]

[Commentary] The wrathful aspect of Rudra at the time of era ending has chanced on Rama to start the elimination 
of demonic clan and this is as observed by caaraNaa-s in firmament. caaraNaa-s are 
those divine beings that journey in heavens in their auspicious paths. Hanuma while jumping the ocean 
to Lanka treads the path of caaraNaa-s because their footpath is so auspicious. For this
skaanda puraaNa has something to tell: rudra tejo 
vilasitam dR^iShTvaa raama kalebaram | sa~Nkham cakra shuulam ca pinaakam kheTam eva ca | khaTvaam ca 
ghanTaam Damaru baaNa paasha ankusham tathaa | caapam vajram khaDgam ca parashum traasa kaaraNam | jaya 
shriyam ca gangaam ca dadR^ishuH siddha caaraNaaH | skaandda puraaNa According to Maheshvara 
Tiirtha.

Shlok 27- 28- 29: While gods, gandharva-s, carana-s are conversing thus, then they have seen there the legions of the 
demons arriving from all over with boisterous noises, spouting cries of bravo, handling their grisly 
skins, shields, weaponry and war-flags, and onrushing at each other in disarray. With brassy twanging 
of bows, with the drumming of war drums, and even by their jumping, leaping and bouncing that area is 
filled with very loud and clamorous noise. [3-24-27, 28, 29]

Shlok 30- 31a: When highly brutish cacophony of demons started to fill the forest, that jangling even panicked the 
brutes ranging in that forest, and those beasts dashed off to other places where silence prevailed, 
without looking back. [3-24-30, 31a]

Shlok 31b- 32a: And that foolhardy army of demons which in simile is like an unnavigable ocean steered towards Rama 
handling many assault weapons. [3-24-31b, 32a]

Shlok 32b- 33a: Casting his sight all-over even that war-expert Rama has seen that army of Khara lunging at a conflict. 
[3-24-32b, 33a]

Shlok 33: Rama stretched his awesome bow to examine the taut of bowstring, and even whipped arrows out of quiver, 
and then adopted a mask of extreme wrath to eliminate all the demons. [3-24-33]

[Commentary] Rama has no built-in feature of ire or wrath. He has to whip it up at times to show divine fury as a 
mask. From the start Vishnu is changing get-ups and when Milky Ocean was churned, He became Mohini, 
and from then on his role-play is continuous in al the incarnations. As said in Bala Kanda 1-1-18:
kaalaagni sadR^ishaH krodhe 'resembles like fierce fire in anger...' thus it is a resemblance, 
not an actuality, even that is unbearable for a glance.
atha yuddha 
samudyata yaatudhaanaanidhaanaaya satvaram udagra kopam aaviShTasya pracaNDa anila dodhuuyamaana jvaalaakalaapa 
yugaanta anala kalpasya sakala jana duShprekShyasya - - dharmaakuutam Even now, on seeing 
Rama's unsightly aspect, should these demons fall prostrate before him, there would no loss to their 
lives. But Khara, as his name itself indicates that he has an asinine mentality, will not yield.

Shlok 34: And when he is enraged and blazing he became frightful-looking like the blazing Fire at the end of era, 
and on seeing such a Rama when he is pervaded with conflagration like anger, the pastoral deities are 
very much annoyed. [3-24-34]

Shlok 35: The all-pacific aspect of that Rama then in his exasperation appeared to be like that of the all-ruinous 
Rudra, the wielder of bow called Pinaki, namely peaceful Shiva when enraged, at the time of Rudra's 
embarking on to ruin the Vedic ritual of Daksha Prajaapati. [3-24-35]

Shlok 36: That army of raw-flesh eaters with their bows, embellishments, and chariots, and also with their armours, 
all glittering with the dazzle of flaming fire, varied into a sky-blue coloured cluster of clouds on 
which the dazzling sunrays will be glittering at the dawning of the sun. [3-24-36]

[Commentary] The metaphor of cloud-clusters with the demons is to explain that the clouds will evaporate on the advent 
of fire-like sun at his dawn or rising of Rama to war. The night-walking demons have their powers increased 
in evening times and dwindled in morning. Thus their fire-like armours will cease to exist when the 
real Sun's fire [or fire of Rama's arrows] starts to flame, their bows cease to exits if the rainbow-giver 
comes in, and their flagging ensigns will cease with the ensigncy of raising sun in sky, and ill becomes 
of them, the evil-doers, after a short while.



SARGA 25
------------------------------

[Text] The ambidextrous archery of Rama is established here for the first time. So far, he has been using his 
archery sporadically, and here it is said to have a different dimension. The speed with which he draws 
arrows from quiver, the quickness with which he strings them, and the precision with which he shoots, 
is suggested here, though not explained. Though no apparent divinity is attached to this excercise, 
it suggests a divine expertise of a human.



There are fourteen thousand demons against one Rama, and the Divine beings watch this from heavens as 
a sport, without according any miraculous powers to Rama, suggesting that a human has to face any number 
of problems, here fourteen thousand demons, for himself and no divine grace suddenly comes to his help.



Rama gives the demons enough time and warning, but as the atrocity is escalating, he uses one gandharva 
missile and many other arrows, which will devastate the entire army of Dushana's brute force.

Shlok 1: Khara on arriving at the hermitage along with forerunning soldiers saw the enemy-eliminator and wrathful 
Rama holding fast to his bow. [3-25-1]

Shlok 2: On seeing Rama that bawling Khara raised his string-taut bow that makes an ass-like braying twang, drove 
his charioteer crazy saying, "drive to the fore of that Rama..." [3-25-2]

Shlok 3: On the orders of Khara the charioteer drove the horses to there where the mighty armed Rama is standing 
single-handedly while swaying his bow. [3-25-3]

Shlok 4: On seeing Khara descending on Rama then all those nightwalkers who are the deputies of Khara encircled 
Khara venting out loud battle cries. [3-25-4]

Shlok 5: Khara staying on his chariot in the thick of those demons appeared to be like coppery-red planet Mars 
up-shot in the thick of stars. [3-25-5]

Shlok 6: In his proneness to war then Khara assaulted that uniquely forceful Rama with a thousand arrows and 
blared a roaring battle cry. [3-25-6]

Shlok 7: All of those infuriated nightwalkers then incessantly rained diverse weapons on that invincibleRama 
who is handling a horrific bow. [3-25-7]

Shlok 8: Those demons that are already caught up with rancour bombarded Rama with bludgeons, lances, tridents, 
darts and hatchets. [3-25-8]

Shlok 9- 10a: Those massive bodied and exceptionally mighty demons came jostling like immense clouds in their eagerness 
to kill Rama in that war, while some mounted on chariots and horsebacks, and some more riding mountain-ridges 
like elephants rushed in on Rama. [3-25-9,10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: And those bands of demons have outpoured arrows on Rama, as with enormous black-clouds disemboguing 
torrents on a lofty mountain. [3-25-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 12a: When hemmed in with those grisly-looking demons Rama appeared like Rudra surrounded by his divine retinue 
called prathama gaNa-s, on certain days, whereupon he starts his all-destructive 
cosmic-dance. [3-25-11b, 12a]

Shlok 12b- 13a: That Raghava has pre-empted those arrows discharged by the demons with his excruciatingly pointed arrows 
as an ocean would do with the river's onrush. [3-25-12b, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: Even if his body is gashed with those gruesome assault weapons Rama is not enfeebled, as with the enormous 
Mt. Meru that can withstand even if battered by very many highly blazing thunderbolts of Indra. [3-25-13, 
14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: Bruised and bedaubed with blood on all his limbs that Rama of Raghu's dynasty took shape of the sun 
enshrouded by cloudscapes at eventide. [3-25-14b, 15a]

[Commentary] Rama is not fading away like the evening sun but becoming more like blood red sun. The 'covering of 
blood' on his limbs suggests the covering of reddish flaring fire on all his limbs, as we say that evening 
sun is stained with blood and fire.

Shlok 15b- 16a: On seeing lone Rama beset by many demons, then the gods, celestials, saints and sublime-sages are dispirited. 
[3-25-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: But Rama on becoming highly infuriated curved his bow to a full circularity on stretching the bowstring 
up to his ear, and then jetted out trenchant arrows in hundreds. Why hundreds? He surged them in thousands. 
[3-25-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18a: In that war Rama sportily discharged eagle-feathered arrows adorned in gold which are unstoppable and 
intolerable, and which in simile are the leads of Time-god. [3-25-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: Those arrows that are playfully discharged on the army of enemy have grabbed the lives of demons like 
the tethers flung by the Time-god. [3-25-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: On impaling the bodies demons, the arrows swamped in blood have gone into welkin, where they are aglow 
with flares equalling inflamed flames. [3-25-19b, 20a]

[Commentary] The similitude between redness of blood and the redness of flaring fire is again suggested, as said 
at 3-25-14b, 15a above.

Shlok 20b- 21a: Innumerable and highly frightening arrows fusilladed from the nimbus of the bow of Rama that resulted 
as the filchers of the lives of demons. [3-25-20b, 21a]

Shlok 21b- 22: In that war, shooting now with hundreds, and now with thousands of such arrows, Rama shredded those 
many bows, pinnacles of war-flags, armours and the like. And even shred are the heads of demons, along 
with their ornamented arms and thighs similar to the trunks of elephants. [3-25-21b, 22]

Shlok 23- 24: With the arrows flung from the bow-bowstring-nimbus of Rama, he indeed shredded and scraped the horses 
hitched with golden harnesses, and the chariots to which they are yoked, and even their charioteers. 
Likewise, he even ripped off the elephants along with their riders, and the horses along with their 
cavaliers. And on eliminating infantrymen in that war Rama led them to the abode of Yama, the Time-god. 
[3-25-23, 24] [3-25-23]

Shlok 25: While ripped to pieces with tubular arrows, with arrows made of iron, and with sharp-edged and crescent-tipped 
arrows those demons have let out disgusting cries of anguish. [3-25-25]

Shlok 26: When those arrows that gore the critical parts are thus harrowing, that army is discomposed like a forest 
burnt to a cinder by wild-fire. [3-25-26]

Shlok 27: Some of the grotesquely sinewy and braving nightwalkers are highly enraged and dashed their darts, tridents, 
and hatchets towards Rama. [3-25-27]

Shlok 28: On fending off those weapons with his arrows that mighty armed and valorous Rama filched away their 
lives by shearing off their necks in that war. [3-25-28]

Shlok 29: Those demons crashed down to earth with their heads severed and shields and bows wrecked, like the trees 
strewn around on earth owing to the gust raised by Garuda, the Divine Eagle, when he takes a sudden 
flight in heavens. [3-25-29]

Shlok 30: Those nightwalkers that are battered by those arrows and remaining there, they desperately rushed towards 
Khara alone seeking shelter. [3-25-30]

Shlok 31: Comforting all of them and taking his bow, very highly infuriated Duushana rushed towards that infuriated 
Rama like the furious Eliminator Yama.



That highly infuriated Duushana rushed towards Rama as highly infuriated Yama rushes towards Rudra, 
where Rudra being the ultimate eliminator himself, angry rush of Yama towards Rudra is therefore futile. 
[3-25-31]

[Commentary] The second meaning can be expressed by substituting the word 'kruddha' with 'rudra' as in other mms 
than that of Gorakhpur version.

Shlok 32: Coming under the shelter of Duushana all of those demons are but emboldened and returned, and they once 
again rushed towards Rama with saala trees, palm trees and boulders as their weapons. [3-25-32]

Shlok 33- 34a: Handling tridents, maces, and leashes those great-mighty demons have created torrents of arrows, missiles, 
trees and boulders, and inundated Rama in that war. [3-25-33, 34a]

Shlok 34b- 35a: Again there chanced a highly gruesome war between Rama and those demons that is tumultuous, stunning, 
and a hair-raising. [3-25-34b, 35a]

Shlok 35b- 36- 37: Those demons have resurfaced from all around pressurising Raghava in high dudgeon. On seeing the reappearance 
of demons from everywhere, with whom all the directions and inter-directions are fully filled, and who 
are storming torrents of arrows, then that exceptionally forceful Rama made a thunderous sound and launched 
an extremely blazing missile among the gather of demons, called gandharva missile. [3-25-35b, 36, 37]

Shlok 38: Then from the nimbus of his bow, arrows in thousand have scurried out, and with them thus arrived all 
the ten sides are cramped up. [3-25-38]

Shlok 39: Either the drawing of those supreme arrows from the quiver, or the traction of bowstring on placing 
them, or unloosing them from the bow is unperceived by those demons that are harrowing under those arrows. 
[3-25-39]

Shlok 40: Darkness caused by the thick of the arrows overspread the sky including its sun, while Rama happened 
to persevere spewing forth his arrows. [3-25-40]

[Commentary] Dark grew the air with arrowy hail / Which hid the sun as with a veil. - Griffith.

Shlok 41: Far and wide the earth is scattered with herds that are falling instantaneously, hosts that have fallen 
instantly, and huddles that are already felled with an instantaneity. [3-25-41]

[Commentary] Fiends wounded, falling, fallen, slain, / All in a moment, spread the plain, - Griffith.

Shlok 42: Thousands of demons are noticeable hither and yon, killed, fallen and enfeebled, and slashed, gashed 
and ripped. [3-25-42]

[Commentary] And thousands scarce alive were left / Mangled, and gashed, and torn, and cleft. - Griffith.

Shlok 43- 44- 45- 46: Some severed heads still have their headgears and some bare, some arms are with armlets and some bare, 
while some with their arms cut off, some with their thighs cut off, some with their divers patterns 
of ornaments on their bodies have fallen on ground. Numerous horses and elephants are felled. Chariots, 
royal-fans, royal-parasols, war-flags of very many kinds are ravaged in many ways. Hit down by Rama's 
arrows spears and tridents are variously splintered, swords broken to pieces, darts and hatchets shattered 
and strewn around. Also the boulders are pulverised, various amazing arrows have gone to rack and ruin 
in many ways. Spread with such wreckage the earth has become horrifying for a glance. [3-25-43, 44, 
45, 46]

Shlok 47: On seeing the killed demons all the surviving demons have become enervated and they are rendered incapable 
to make a move towards Rama, the conqueror of enemy's capitals. [3-25-47]



SARGA 26
------------------------------

[Text] Rama eliminates fourteen thousand demons led by Duushana. Firstly, the forerunning demons are killed, 
next Duushana is routed, and then twelve other captains who on knowing Duushana's downfall dashed towards 
Rama. Left behind are only two, Khara and Trishira, the chiefs of that demonic force in Janasthaana.

Shlok 1: On seeing the shattering of his own forces, Duushana bid five thousand mighty-armed nightwalkers of 
monstrous impetus, and who knew no retreat in war, to attack Rama. [3-26-1]

Shlok 2b- 3a: And they with spears, scimitars, swords, and with the rains of boulders, trees and arrows rained incessantly 
and inordinately upon Rama from all over. [3-26-2b, 3a]

Shlok 3b- 4a: Raghava, the virtue-souled, in his turn has neutralised that ghastly and life-taking storm of boulders 
and trees with his fierce arrows. [3-26-3b, 4a]

Shlok 4b- 5a: Like a bull receiving rain with closed eyes Rama assimilated that storming and then evoked an inordinate 
infuriation for eliminating all of the demons. [3-26-4b, 5a]

Shlok 5b- 6a: Exasperation prevailing on him who appeared to be highly blazing with the blaze of his own virtue, he 
then diffused Duushana and his army with arrows from all over. [3-26-5b, 6a]

Shlok 6b- 7a: And on becoming enraged Duushana, the railer of his rivals and the commander of that army, then virtually 
forestalled Raghava's onslaught with his arrows that are simulative of thunderbolts. [3-26-6b, 7a]

Shlok 7b- 8a: That valiant one in warring Rama is then infuriated and with his crescent-barbed arrow shivered the 
sturdy bow of Duushana, shredding four of his horses with four more arrows. [3-26-7b, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: On destructing the horses with excruciating arrows, he even fragmented the head of the charioteer with 
a crescent-barbed arrow, and even impaled the chest of demon Duushana with some more arrows. [3-26-8b, 
9a]

[Commentary] One crescent dart he aimed which shred / Clean from his neck the driver's head; / Three more with deadly 
skill addressed / Stood quivering in the giant's breast. - Griffith.

Shlok 9b- 10- 11: With his bow fractured and chariot shredded, and with horses and charioteer killed, he that Duushana 
grabbed a mace which outranks a peak of mountain and a hair-thriller at its sight, and which girt with 
golden girths once gritted the armies of gods, the head of which is studded with incisive iron spikes 
and saturated with the fat of foes, a coequal of a diamond and a thunderbolt in its hardiness and flashiness, 
and a ransacker of the archways of fortresses of his adversaries. [3-26-9b, 10, 11]

Shlok 12: On firmly gripping that mace which in war is akin to an infernal serpent, and the touch of which tantamount 
to snakebite, rushed that nightwalker Duushana with infernal exerts rushed towards Rama. [3-26-12]

Shlok 13: While Duushana came falling on, he that Raghava sheared off his shoulders that have wrist-ornaments 
on his arms with two arrows. [3-26-13]

Shlok 14: When Duushana's arms are thus sheared in the van of war, his gigantic mace slipped and spun in his own 
front, like the flagstaff with flag raised in honour of Indra, and collapsed . [3-26-14]

Shlok 15: With both of his arms strewn around Duushana fell down onto earth like a haughty and gigantic elephant 
when both of its tusks are broken down. [3-26-15]

Shlok 16: On seeing Duushana eliminated and fallen to ground, all the beings have applauded Rama saying, 'good, 
good...' [3-26-16]

Shlok 17- 18a: In the meantime infuriated are the three leading commanders of that army, namely Mahakapaala, Sthulaaksha 
and great mighty Pramaathii, and they collectively ran towards Rama, bound by the rein of death. [3-26-17, 
18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: Mahakapaala raising a broad trident, Sthulaaksha handling a scimitar, Pramaathi handling an axe rushed 
towards Rama. [3-26-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: As one would receive guests meeting his basic needs, Raghava too took on these untimely guests of war, 
rather the insurgents, meeting their basic needs which now are no more than highly sharpened acute edged 
arrows, when he saw them coming and falling upon him, inopportunely. [3-26-19b, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21- 22- 23a: Rama, the legatee of Raghu, chopped off the head of Mahakapaala, with incalculable spates of arrows 
he eliminated Pramaathi, and filled the bulging eyes of Sthulaaksha with arrows by which Sthulaaksha 
is killed and fell down onto ground like a burly tree with its broad branches. Then still infuriated 
Rama forthwith eliminated the five thousand hench-demons of Duushana with five thousand arrows, and 
thus he led them to the residence of Time-god, namely the hell. [3-26-20b, 21, 22, 23a]

[Commentary] The words viTapi 'a tree with branches and twigs...' and druma 'a tree' in general. 
Though they are similar to give the general meaning of a tree, they are juxtaposed taking the viTapi 
as the adjective of the word druma. This is not exactly synonymic usage, but a shade of difference 
is available in both words. Readers may please refer to the excellent book of Dr. Satya Vrat, The Ramayana 
- A Linguistic Study.

Shlok 23b- 24a: On hearing about the killing of Duushana and also thus of the followers of Duushana, Khara irately ordered 
his army captains, under whose captaincy mighty forces are there. [3-26-23b, 24a]

Shlok 24b- 25: "Duushana is killed in war along with his followers, hence all you demons, take formidable army, take 
weapons of diverse designs, combat and kill that evil-human Rama..." Thus Khara ordered the remaining 
demons. [3-26-24b, 25]

Shlok 26- 27- 28: Saying so Khara himself rushed towards Rama in rage, and Shyenagaami, Prithugriiva, Yajnashatru, Vihangama 
Durjaya, Karaviiraaksha, Parusha, Kaalakaarmuka, Hemamaali, Mahaamaali, Sarpaasya, and Rudhiraaksha 
are the twelve fiendishly atrocious troop leaders of demonic forces, and they too rushed towards Rama 
launching their atrocious arrows. [3-26-26, 27, 28]

Shlok 29: He who is resplendent that Rama then annihilated the remaining demons of that army with his arrows that 
are embellished with gold and diamonds, and that are blazing like ritual-fires. [3-26-29]

Shlok 30: With those arrows that have golden tailpieces and sharp barbs, and that are dazzling like fuming ritual 
fires Rama felled the demons, as Thunderbolts of Indra will be felling gigantic trees. [3-26-30]

Shlok 31: With a hundred rudder like arrows Rama hit down a hundred demons, and with a thousand more, thousand 
more demons are hit in the forefront of that war. [3-26-31]

Shlok 32: Ripped are their shields and armorial-ornaments, ruined and rickety are their bows, and they the nightwalkers 
fell flat on ground, bodies wholly smudged with blood. [3-26-32]

Shlok 33: With those demons that have fallen down in war, whose hair is tousled and who are drenched in blood, 
entire earth looked like a vast altar of fire overspread with holy grass. [3-26-33]

Shlok 34: That forest which became sludgy with the flesh and blood of killed demons and very disgusting, in a 
moment it became identical with hell. [3-26-34]

Shlok 35: Thus that Rama, a lone one, that too a foot-soldier, has eliminated fourteen thousand demons of frightening 
exploits. [3-26-35]

Shlok 36: Of his entire army great-charioteer Khara and Trishira are the remaining nightwalkers, and Rama, the 
enemy destroyer, naturally on the other side. [3-26-36]

[Commentary] The last compound in the second foot indicates that Rama is also remaining as one among the army of 
Khara, which is found irksome to some scholars. They said that the older mms contain the expression
hata sheSau nishaaacaraa instead of raamaH ca ripu suudanaH taking the finishing line 
from the opening words of next verse. Otherwise, it can be said 'on the side of Khara only two demons, 
namely Khara and Trishira are remaining, and on the other side Rama is remaining...' as given here. 
But it is said to be inappropriate, because Rama cannot be grouped with the killable side. Further, 
there are some more petty demons besides Khara and Trishira, to carry a word to Ravana, as said in the 
coming chapters.

Shlok 37: Lakshmana's elder brother Rama eliminated all of the remaining demons in the forefront of war who are 
highly valorous, ghastly and unbearable. [3-26-37]

Shlok 38: Then on surveying that great demonic force which is eliminated by Rama in that staggering war, Khara 
then marched on to reach Rama in a huge chariot, as with Indra who will march upraising his Thunderbolt. 
[3-26-38]



SARGA 27
------------------------------

[Text] Trishira, the demon, supersedes Khara to fight Rama at his turn. He hits Rama with arrows for which 
Rama says that it is no more than the patting with flowers. Then a combat ensues and Rama becoming infuriated 
eliminates Trishira in the battle.

Shlok 1: But when Khara is about to lunge to the forefront of Rama, nearing him the commander of demonic forces 
named Trishira spoke this to him. [3-27-1]

Shlok 2: "Desisting from your personal adventure you enjoin me for I am an invader, and then you are certain 
to see me felling that mighty-armed Rama in combat. [3-27-2]

[Commentary] The spirit of soldiery is explained in this verse. When junior rankers are available, they are not supposed 
to allow higher ups to lunge forward in the first instance. Dharmaakuutam puts it thus, in Maha Bharata 
war, when Duryodhana himself wanted to deal with Arjuna, Ashvatthaama holds him back saying: mayi 
jiivati gaandhaare na yuddham kartum arhasi ... aham aavaara iSyaami paartham tiSTa suyodhana... 
'when I am alive you are not supposed to combat, I will take over Arjuna, you stay back, oh, Suyodhana...' 
But the same Suyodhana does not show this much war-nicety when killing the lone Abhimanyu, the son of 
Arjuna.

Shlok 3: "Taking oath on my weapon I promise to you that I truly wish to kill this Rama, as he deserves ill of 
all the demons by killing. [3-27-3]

Shlok 4: "Hold back your combative-adventurism and become an examiner to decide whether I am going to become 
his god of death in this combat, or he becomes mine. [3-27-4]

[Commentary] The word praashnikaH is said to a rare expression meaning 'one who asks questions, an examiner, 
a judge...' in its fine sense. Secondarily, it is 'a witness' 'a spectator.' [After Prof. Satya Vrat.]

Shlok 5: "If I were to kill Rama you may gladly proceed to Janasthaana, else if Rama kills me then you can adventurously 
proceed against him for a combat." Thus Trishira spoke to Khara. [3-27-5]

[Commentary] These verses have commentary in depth. sarva raakshasaam vadhaa artham 'he who is meant to 
kill all the demons...' raamam 'about that Rama...' yathaa - yathaa vat 'as it is, 
in his true form; aham prati jaanaami ' I am in the full know of him...' 'I know fully well 
that this Rama has come to eliminate all the demons...' These are the same words told by Sage Vishvamitra 
to Dasharatha when he came to take Rama and Lakshmana. tam vadhiSyaami ' him, I shall kill...' 
for that only sarvam aayudham aalabhe... 'all weaponry I am handling...' 'However, knowing 
him well I am handling these weapons for sake of show, only entice him to accord salvation to me firstly...' 
because aham vaa raNe mR^ityuH? 'can I be his death in war? No I cannot... eSa vaa samre 
mama mR^ityuH 'he is my death in combat...' muhur praasniko bhava for a while you become 
an examiner, and examine and know it yourself; raame a + hate sati, mayi ca nihate sati 'if 
Rama is not killed by me, or if I am killed by Rama, then you can adventurously proceed to him, and 
have your turn to get salvation at Rama's arrows...'

Shlok 6: By that death-greedy demon Trishira, Khara is manoeuvred and Khara to him said 'begone... combat...' 
and thus permitted, Trishira proceeded to the forefront of Rama. [3-27-6]

Shlok 7: Trishira with a lustrous chariot that is yoked with equally lustrous horses hurried towards Rama in 
that war, like a tri-peaked mountain, for they say, he is a tri-headed demon. [3-27-7]

Shlok 8: Discharging hosts of arrow-torrents like a hefty-arrow-cloud, he readily discharged a noise similar 
to the thudding drumbeat when a water-wet war-drum is beaten, rather than a blast from a heated drum. 
[3-27-8]

Shlok 9: On seeing the oncoming of that demon Trishira, Raghava welcomed him by speedily winnowing smarting arrows 
from his bow. [3-27-9]

Shlok 10: That grave and tumultuous encounter chanced between Rama and Trishira is like the extremely forceful 
encounter between a loin and an elephant. [3-27-10]

Shlok 11: Later when Trishira smote on the forehead of highly enraged Rama with three arrows, Rama's ire is intensified 
and he franticly said this to that demon. [3-27-11]

Shlok 12: "Oho! What an energy of a triumphing adventurer is this! A demon with this sort of energy is adventuring 
me, whose arrows rap my forehead peripherally, like flowers! [3-27-12]

Shlok 13- 14a: "Now you accept arrows plunging from the string of my bow..." saying thus, that infuriated Rama with 
his alacritous swiftness hit the chest of Trishira with fourteen arrows similar to venomous snakes. 
[3-27-13, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: With four of his straight shooting arrows that have hook-like barbs, that resplendent Rama hewed down 
four of the speedy horses of Trishira's chariot. [3-27-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: With eight arrows Rama felled the charioteer from his settle on the chariot, and with one arrow ripped 
off the high flying flag on that chariot. [3-27-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: When that nightwalker is vaulting from that smashed chariot Rama with his arrows tore his chest to shreds 
and he that Trishira became inert. [3-27-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18a: And with three sharp and rapid arrows, and even with his own exasperation, Rama of inestimable aptitude 
rolled the three heads that demon. [3-27-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: When that nightwalker is highly tortured with Rama's arrows he collapsed spewing blood with fumes, whereat 
he is standing in war, at where his three heads rolled just now. [3-27-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: As with the fleeing of deer alarmed by a tiger, the demons remaining after liquidation, whom Khara has 
protected so far and whose confidence is now shattered, are running away, and they gave Khara the run-around. 
[3-27-19b, 20a]

Shlok 20b: On seeing at those deserters Khara is piqued and quickly brought them back to his control, and then 
as with the scampering of eclipsing planet Rahu towards moon during lunar-eclipse, he scurried towards 
Rama alone. [3-27-20b, c]



SARGA 28
------------------------------

[Text] Khara the demon brother of Shuurpanakha confronts Rama when all of his valiant warriors are eliminated. 
He wages a fearful war showing all his expertise and he even brings down the amour of Rama with his 
arrows. The combat of Rama and Khara takes a longer time, as Khara is not easy-to-deal demon.

Shlok 1: Khara is intimidated on seeing the elimination of Duushana along with Trishira inasmuch as the intrepidity 
of Rama is concerned. [4-28-1]

Shlok 2- 3: On seeing the annihilation of the insufferable and mighty force of demons, even that of Duushana and 
Trishira by lone Rama, and thus to apprehend that the demonic force is wholly destructed, that demon 
Khara became apprehensive, and then he lunged at Rama, as with demon Namuchi who once lunged at Indra. 
[4-28-2, 3]

Shlok 4: Forcefully drawing the bowstring fitted with iron-arrows, which looked like furious serpents of venom 
ingesting only blood, Khara discharged them on Rama. [4-28-4]

Shlok 5: Fidgeting with bowstring in many a way, brandishing missiles with many a skill, Khara moved about the 
battleground in many a manner, seated on chariot and showing his expertise with arrows. [4-28-5]

Shlok 6: That great chariot-fighter Khara then started to fill all the stretches and inter-stretches with arrows, 
seeing that even Rama reciprocally started to take aim with his bow Rama, and then filled and made the 
sky less of leeway with verily unendurable arrows that are like tongues of fire emitting sparks, as 
with Rain-god chocking the sky with torrents, less of latitude. [4-28-6, 7]

Shlok 8: No empty space is left out in the space around since it has become riotous with the sharp arrows discharged 
by Rama and Khara from everywhere. [4-28-8]

Shlok 9: While both of them are warring with excitement to slay one another, then the sun obscured with the mesh 
of arrows has not shined. [4-28-9]

Shlok 10: Then with acutely edged tubular, iron, and crescent-edged arrows Khara swatted Rama in that combat, 
as a great elephant will be swatted with a goad. [4-28-10]

Shlok 11: When charioted Khara came to the presence of Rama with bow in hand and ready for a close combat, that 
demon appeared to all beings as the Terminator handling his noose. [4-28-11]

Shlok 12: Khara presumed that greatly indefatigable Rama is wholly fatigued by now, though he has shown his mettle 
of boldness in eliminating all of the demonic forces, all the while. [4-28-12]

Shlok 13: On seeing Khara who is prancing like a lion with a gait of a lion, Rama is unruffled like a lion that 
sees a least beast. [4-28-13]

[Commentary] For the last compound in second foot the other versions contain siMhaH siMham iva aparam 'a 
lion on seeing another lion...' Firstly comparing Khara with lion and later comparing him with kshudra 
mR^iga 'petty animal...' is not found aesthetic by some scholars.

Shlok 14: In a chariot that equals the sun in its radiance then Khara reached Rama as a moth reaches fire. [4-28-14]

Shlok 15: Showing sleight of hand Khara then broke the handgrip of the bow of that great-souled Rama along with 
an arrow fitted on it. [4-28-15]

Shlok 16: Still infuriated Khara has drawn seven more arrows that equal the radiance of Indra's thunderbolts and 
hit Rama's armour in that war. [4-28-16]

Shlok 17: Then, on distressing Rama of unequalled vitality with a thousand arrows in that combat Khara blared 
a loud blare. [4-28-17]

Shlok 18: With the arrows released by Khara that have a great egress, then that armour of Rama that has a sun-like 
resplendence is completely destroyed and fell on the field. [4-28-18]

Shlok 19: When all his limbs are hit with arrows Rama is enraged and in that war Rama flared up like a fumeless 
flaring fire. [4-28-19]

Shlok 20: Then Rama, the blaster of enemies, strung bowstring to another thunderously blasting bow, to end the 
enemy. [4-28-20]

Shlok 21: That which is a very admirable bow of Vishnu and that which is awarded by great-sage Agastya, upraising 
that choicest bow Rama rushed towards Khara. [4-28-21]

Shlok 22: With arrows that have golden fins and curved barbs that highly infuriated Rama then fragmented Khara's 
flagstaff with flag in that war. [4-28-22]

Shlok 23: That eye-pleasing golden flagstaff with flag is severally shattered and fell onto ground as if it is 
god-damned sun fallen on earth. [4-28-23]

Shlok 24: By that Khara is enraged, and as one who is aware of striking crucial parts/war tactics assaulted on 
the chest of Rama with four arrows, and even on other limbs, as one would prod an elephant with lancets. 
[4-28-24]

Shlok 25: Impacted with various arrows unloosened from the bow of Khara, limbs of Rama are drenched in blood and 
he became highly indignant. [4-28-25]

Shlok 26: On aiming his great bow that ablest one among archers, namely Rama, then in that war released six arrows 
targeting pointedly. [4-28-26]

Shlok 27: Rama indeed hit Khara's head with one arrow, with two his hands, and next with three crescent shaped 
arrows he hit his chest. [4-28-27]

Shlok 28: Then afterwards that great-resplendent Rama wishing to eliminate the demon, infuriately launched 
thirteen iron arrows that are sharply whetted and similar to the dazzle of sun. [4-28-28]

Shlok 29- 30- 31: That mighty Raghava who equals Indra in combats, smiling at the warfare of Khara, smashed the yoke of 
the chariot with one arrow; with four, four of the dappled horses; with the sixth, the head of the charioteer 
of Khara; with three, the three-pronged shaft from yoke to the base of chariot; with two the axels, 
thus that chariot is fragmented. Then, on wrecking Khara's bow on which an arrow is placed with the 
twelfth, that mighty one Rama impaled Khara with the thirteenth arrow that is similar to a thunderbolt. 
[4-28-29, 30, 31]

Shlok 32: With his bow utterly shattered, chariot fragmented, horses killed, and charioteer felled, that Khara 
then hopped down to ground from the dilapidated chariot wielding a mace, and stood fast. [4-28-32]

Shlok 33: The gods as well as great-sages have then came together and assembled in heavens, and those assemblies 
that are aboard their aircrafts are highly gladdened at the exploit of the great chariot-fighter Rama, 
and they worshipped him with their adjoined palms. [4-28-33]



SARGA 29
------------------------------

[Text] Khara provokes Rama to fight, but Rama gives enough advise to Khara to yield up. Khara presumes that 
Rama is overtired to fight him back and thus enters into verbal fight. Ultimately Khara hurls a mammoth 
mace at Rama, which burns down all the neighbouring plants and bushes, and Rama splinters it down while 
it is still sky rocketing.

Shlok 1: Rama, the great-resplendent, spoke these words forbiddingly albeit softly to Khara who lost his chariot 
but staying his course wielding a mace. [3-29-1]

[Commentary] Rama is said to have tested whether Khara is ready to surrender or not, at least at this stage of loosing 
all paraphernalia of war. Hence he is said to have talked softly but harshly to that demon.

Shlok 2: "Although you hold sway over a gigantic force abounding with elephants horses and chariots, you have 
perpetrated heinous deeds in Dandaka forests that are loathsome to all the worlds, that is unseemliest 
to this soldiery. [3-29-2]

Shlok 3: "One who causes suffering to living beings, besides being a transgressor and completely ruthless, he 
does not stand up for himself even if he were to be the lord of all the three worlds. [3-29-3]

Shlok 4: "All people will eliminate him, oh, nightwalker, who is imperious and an infringer of worldly routine, 
as they would eradicate a vicious serpent, in the event of its running across them. [3-29-4]

Shlok 5: "He who goes on performing evils selfishly, obsessively, heedlessly, more so delightedly, he will see 
the results of his own doings, like red-tailed-lizard on its eating self-destructive hailstones, obsessively 
and delightedly. [3-29-5]

[Commentary] Hailstones are life-taking poisonous pellets to this particular red- tailed lizard, called brahmaNi 
. It is still called as 'bamaani' in Bhojpuri vernacular of Hindi.

[Commentary] Parting with some parts of one's own accrual is lobha, and craving for that which is absolutely 
unavailable is moha. People tend to commit sin while protecting their own accruals as well 
as trying to acquire unavailable things. But any person, if goes on undertaking these evils, even after 
realizing that both are mistakes, it is an unpardonable crime. The metaphor of a red-tail-lizard is 
said to be unavailable in older scripts. There is another variation to this foot wherein the simile 
is with a Brahman bereft of his self-respect, and that foot reads as: bhrSTaH pashyati duHkham sa 
braahmaNa paravaan iva .

[Commentary] Next, implying the prospective question of Khara, viz., 'What sin I have committed?' Rama answers it 
in the next verse.

Shlok 6: "The residents of Dandaka forest are the highly-propitious sages that tread the path of virtue, and 
oh, demon, what benefit you gain in killing them, really? [3-29-6]

[Commentary] Again Khara may ask, 'There are many more sinners, what will become of them, why holding me alone responsible?' 
For this Rama is saying that the sinners in general will get their punishment after their mortality 
when karmic cycle is over. But those that are not only sinners but cruel, and even abhorred by world, 
will ruin here only, because their merit accumulated in earlier births has come to a standstill on this 
earth itself. Those sinners will become like petrified trees trunks, they neither fall nor their boughs 
flower.

Shlok 7: "Even if a fortune is made for a lavish living with an iota of merit, the evildoers, that too reprobates, 
further more those that are abominated by world will not last long, no more that petrified tree trunks. 
[3-29-7]

Shlok 8: "One who undertakes evildoings will definitely and seasonably reap their fruits, which in his case will 
be ghoulish, as with the flowering of trees according to season. [3-29-8]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: That fruit of sin will not be immediate alike the a crop that yields long after sowing. 
Moreover the fruit of sin will be venomous, for the greedy harvester of that sin alone will devour it.

Shlok 9: "In the world one acquires the fruit of profane acts not before long, oh, nightwalker, and it will be 
like venomous food devoured. [3-29-9]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: 'As one quickly acquires the results of the venomous food devoured, oh, nightwalker, 
the perpetrator of profane acts will acquire their fruits that quickly, in the world.' Eating food, 
or committing a sin is simply subjective. If one commits sin unknowingly, that will be as good as the 
intake of venomous food, unsuspectingly. Both the poisonous food, and committing sins will act internally 
and rapidly than any other ruinous inflictor. Then the sinner, or the consumer of poisonous food will 
acquire an inconsolable wretched state.

Shlok 10: "I am the king who arrived to exterminate the lives of those that perpetrate hideous sins, and even 
of those that wish to do evils to the disapprobation of world.



"I am the one who arrived at the behest of the king Dasharatha, or Bharata to exterminate the lives 
of those that perpetrate hideous sins, and even of those that wish to do evils to the disapprobation 
of world. [3-29-10]

[Commentary] The word 'raaj~na' is 'sent by some king' for it is in fifth case. Whereas the word 'raajaa' is 'as a 
king I have come...' This is as appearing in some mms. Dharmaakuutam uses 'raaj~naa' and says:
: anena loka 
upadrava karaH raaj~naa avashyam shikShaNiiyam iti suucitam | and he goes on quoting
vidura niiti Vidura's morals in Maha Bharata:
gururaatmavataam 
shaastaa shaastaa duraatmanaam | antaH pracchanna paapaanaam shaastaa vaivasvato yamaH ||

Shlok 11: "Now, my arrows that are decorated in gold will be released on you like snakes rebounding from a snake-pit, 
and they will tear you asunder, and on riving you they will bounce back into my quivers. [3-29-11]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: My arrows can pierce through your body, not only your body but to the core of earth, 
and they bounce back to re-enter my quivers like the snakes that emerge from snake pits and return to 
their pits when their task is over. Or, when these arrows enter your body that is akin to a snake pit, 
they will kill all the sins lying like snakes inside that body of yours, and return to my quivers.

Shlok 12: "Now eliminated in war, you along with your army will tread behind those sages that were treading the 
path of virtue, on whom you have so far feasted in Dandaka forest. [3-29-12]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: A kind of assurance is sounded here by Rama's words in saying that Khara will be absolved 
of his sins. Those that are eliminated by Rama are sure to get salvation. Here not only Khara but also 
entire army is going to get that salvation, if Khara surrenders at least at this stage. In Skanda Purana 
it is said: raama vidDhaa 
nishaacaraa baaNaiH su taaDitaaH | raamam aasaadya samare saayujya padaviim gataaH || skaanda puraaNa 
But this saayujua, salvation or getting to heavens is of a variety. In war those that sacrifice 
themselves in the fire of arrows will get indra loka. Those that conduct warfare unhappily 
thinking that death is the only result of war they get gandharva loka. Those that retreat or 
go begging for their lives and yet killed, they get guhya loka, and those that are fully aware 
of Kshatriya dharma and conduct righteous warfare they go to brahma loka. So says Maha Bharata. 
The same is said Bhagavad Gita yam yam vaa 
api smaran bhaavam tyajatyante kalebaram | tam tam evaiti kaunteya sadaa tad bhaava bhaavitaH || 
Gita 8-6.

Shlok 13: "Let the supreme sages who were earlier slain by you may now see abiding on their aircrafts, your abidance 
in hellish death pangs when assaulted with my arrows. [3-29-13]

[Commentary] The word nirayastham is literally 'in hell of Yama' but here it is the hell-like situation 
caused by Rama's arrows. If the literal meaning of 'in hell' is taken the above assurance of salvation 
etc., will be futile, hence, it is 'hellish pangs' by the hit of arrows.

Shlok 14: "Attack me as you wish... make an effort... you the knave of your clan... now I am going to toss your 
head down like a palm-fruit..." Thus Rama addressed Khara. [3-29-14]

[Commentary] It is questioned whether Rama is self-eulogizing when talking this way to Khara. It is contradicted 
saying that yuddha kaale 
viira vaadasya sva paraakrama anusaareNa utsaaha abhivR^idhyartham para tiraskaara artham ca - aatma 
stuti - karaNe doSha abhaavaat | dk 'there is nothing wrong in foretelling how brave a 
warrior is and it will not come under self-praise, in war...' and the commentator goes on quoting many 
references, for e.g., Karna in Maha Bharata says:
shuuraaH 
garjanbti satatam praavR^iShi iva balaahakaaH | 'brave ones will be regularly thundering 
like thundering clouds...'

Shlok 15: But when Rama said thus, Khara is infuriated and convulsed in anger, and he replied Rama with bloodshot 
eyes, laughing boisterously. [3-29-15]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: Khara 'laughed at' Rama's words of self-praise means that even the Supreme Being untiringly 
does some self-praise like telling 'I am here to save you... seek refuge in me for I alone can save...' 
in order to make Himself known to the adamants. The whole concept of Bhagavad Gita in telling that 'I 
am here... Know me thus...' etc., is for the same purpose. Thus, this is a laughable situation to those 
who are already in the know of Being. Presently it is Khara who was great Vedic Brahman once, but became 
an ogre by curse. Contrariwise, it is a 'laughable talk' of the Supreme Being, to non-knowers or for 
the non-adherers.

Shlok 16: "On killing average demons in war, oh, son of Dasharatha, how you praise yourself when you yourself 
are un-praiseworthy?" Thus Khara started to speak to Rama. [3-29-16]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: For this self-praise it is said that Khara estimated Rama as an unworthy being in the 
parlance of mortals. kharaH tu 
kopaat asamartho raama iti bhraantaa uktavaan iti no ko api doShaH | dk But as a cursed 
Vedic Brahman who is in the know of Rama as Vishnu is retorting Rama saying 'you also need to self-eulogise, 
when I am fully aware of you and come hither to gain my salvation at your hand? You are not supposed 
to self-extol before small beings like us...'

Shlok 17: "Those best of men that are victorious and mighty will not boast anything, for they will be really proud 
of their own valour. [3-29-17]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: This is said otherwise: ye nararSabhaaH 'those best ones among men like you...'
te 'by them...' [adhyaahaarya] evam 'elliptic: this way...' na kathayanti 
'do not praise themselves...' tejasaa svena garvitaaH kathayanti some of 'those that are proud 
of their own valorous resplendence, they speak up their glory, vaingloriously...' 'So it is unapt of 
you to speak up for yourself, for we are in the know of it, and we are waiting for our release from 
our curse at your hand...' Tiirtha.

Shlok 18: "Oh, Rama, as to how undignified Kshatriya-s that are frivolous and irresolute in self-confidence will 
boast in the world, likewise you too are boasting in a meaningless manner. [3-29-18]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: Khara's intent is: kSatriya paamsanaaH 'the Kshatriya, worthless... worthless 
Kshatriya-s...' yathaa nir arthakam vikatthase 'as to how they meaninglessly speak up for themselves...'
raama tvam vikatthante 'oh, Rama, you are speaking like that...' 'It is unapt of you to talk 
vainly like any other average Kshatriya, as you are an incarnate in a best Kshatriya clan, and you do 
your duty righteously without much talk...' Tiirtha.

Shlok 19: "Who will be that valiant that speaks about his lineage at wartime, that too, when the death-time is 
looming large! And, there will there be someone who broaches his self-extols in such an inopportune 
situation, is it! [3-29-19]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: Khara's saying is: samare 'in war...' [adhyaahaara]: shatru pakshe 
'elliptic: on the enemy's side...' mR^ityu kaale sampraapte sati 'death time, while chancing, 
that being so...' stavam ko vaa abhidaasyati 'self-praise, who, either, speaks out...' Thus, 
Khara's saying is: 'where is the necessity for any warrior to self-eulogise when the death-time is hovering 
upon his enemy? And you, as Rama, are on the winning spree in this war, and there is no necessity to 
extol yourself...' Tiirtha.

Shlok 20: "Howsoever your ignominy is well shown by your self-praise, like the manifestation of gold on the tip 
of grass-blade burnt by fire, where the fire on grass-blade is no fire, and the bulb of fire appearing 
at the tip of grass-blade as a bulb of gold, is no gold. [3-29-20]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: A blade of grass when burnt, immediately glows and manifests a globe of golden flame, 
but it is too quick to evanish thus it can not burn the gold to refine it. katthanena 'by broaching...'
te laghutvam 'your ignominy...' sarvathaiva vidarshitam ' in every way, well-shown...' 
and that ignominy is looking like taptena 'burnt...' kusha agninaa 'fire abiding the 
grass-blade...' suvarNa pratiruupeNa 'golden in hue...' laghutvam vidarshyate yathaa tathaa 
'lowliness of fire proper will be shown by that fire on grass-blade, likewise... tava laghutvam 
eva vidarshitam bhavat 'so also your own lowliness is made evident...' 'A small fire on a small 
grass-blade quickly burns though with a golden hue, but it cannot sustain its flame to burn other things. 
It burns the grass-blade on which it sits. So, self-ruinous is your self-eulogy...' Govindaraja.

[Commentary] kusha agninaa 'by grass-blade's fire...' that is used to purify golden material in rituals;
suvarNa prati ruupeNa 'gold, equalling in aspect...' namely brass items; taptena 'if 
burnt to purify...'; laghutvam 'stain of blakishness...'; If brass items are put to the same 
small fire of grass-blade they immediately become smoky, however small the fire may be; Thus te 
'by you...' katthanena 'by self-praising...' laghutvam vidarshitam 'your futility 
is well-shown...' Maheshvara Tiirtha.

[Commentary] suvarNa prati ruupeNa tapyatena ashmanaa agninaa is another text. In this ashmanaa 
is 'stone...' If anyone touches a stone that is similar to fire outwardly, he does not feel the heat 
of the fire by the cold touch of stone. Thus, his 'foolishly mistaken identity' makes a fool of himself. 
Thus Khara is saying 'I was thinking that Rama is a very great valiant person, but by way of listening 
your self-eulogies, at an inopportune time, you appear to be a cold stone but not a firebrand... One 
who goes on self-eulogising without taking any action in a war is a coward but not a victor...' Thus 
Khara is quickening Rama to proceed with fighting so that the ensuing salvation can also be quickened.

Shlok 21: "But you are seeing me wielding a mace and standing before you like an unshakable and jagged mountain 
laden with ores, isn't it! [3-29-21]

Shlok 22: "As to how the Terminator wielding noose is enough to take away all the lives in all the three worlds, 
handling my mace I am enough for detracting your life from you. [3-29-22]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: 'I am not competent enough to combat with you...' is the sense that is drawn out.
gadaa dharam maam pashyasi nanu 'mace-wielder, me, you see, though...' 'Though you see me wielding 
this mace...' paasha hasta antaka iva 'noose-wielder Yama, Terminator, like...' 'Though I appear 
to be noose-wielding Terminator...' trayaNaam api lokaanaam praaNaan hantum paryaaptaH yadyapi tathaa 
api 'Though I can strike down the lives of all in all the three worlds with this single mace as 
Yama does so with only one noose...' raNe tava na paryaaptaH 'in war, with you, not, competent... 
'I am not competent enough to fight with you in war, for I am an inferior being in comparison to you, 
oh, Supreme Being...'

Shlok 23: "Even though much is to be said in your respect I will not continue to say, for the sun is getting at 
the dusk thereby disruption to war occurs. [3-29-23]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: This is the devil's advocacy about dharma yuddha 'righteous warfare...' which 
righteous war is generally waged from morning till evening. Khara says that 'because the sun is dusking 
you humans cannot war with us, the nightwalkers who are adept in night-wars. Thus by killing you in 
nighttime does not prove my victory, for your warfare is from sunrise to sunset. Hence, this war is 
to be stalled. If you quicken now without self-extolling, I will kill you before sunset, proving my 
chivalry and then I can dab the eyes of the wives of the demons so far killed by you...'

Shlok 24: "You have killed fourteen thousand demons and on killing you I will wipe the tears of the wives of those 
dead demons today itself." Khara said so to Rama. [3-29-24]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: Khara cannot return to his place after sacrificing these many demons. Either he should 
win or be won over. So 'when these many demons are eliminated by you... tvad vinaashaat = tvattaH 
naashaat 'by you if I am eliminated...' eSaam ashru pramaarjanam karomi 'their tears I 
will wipe... 'For I sacrificed fourteen thousand kinsmen of mine, and if I am also killed by you, their 
wives do not find fault with me and my death will wipe their tears out... that is why, though you tried 
to pacify and avert me from warring with soft talk mR^idu puurva bhaaSaNena, as at 3-29-1. 
I can not but war, and you need not think that I am heedless of your words...' Tiirtha.

Shlok 25: Saying thus that highly infuriated Khara hurled his mace towards Rama, around which there are superb 
golden cinctures, and which is extremely glaring like a thunderbolt. [3-29-25]

Shlok 26: Forcefully discharged from Khara's hands that highly fiery and stupendous mace rendering trees and shrubs 
down to ashes darted towards Rama. [3-29-26]

Shlok 27: When that monstrous mace similar to the halter of the Terminator is swooping down, Rama smashed it to 
smithereens with his arrows while it is still sky rocketing. [3-29-27]

Shlok 28: That mace splintered with arrows of Rama fell crumbling onto the surface of earth as a springing female 
snake would fall down by the strength of spells and nostrums. [3-29-28]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: The mention about Khara's mace may be noticed. In the text, its reference has come 
more often and at the end it is said to have burnt down the vegetation along its course of travel, which 
indicates that it has some radiation power. Without making it to touch the ground, Rama has splintered 
it in sky itself, and its destruction is metaphoric with a venomous serpent, and hymns and herbs can 
bring down that serpent. That is to say even if venomous missiles are used their antidotes are ready 
at hand. For this Dharmaakuutam says, without expanding:
anena mantra 
auShadhi balaiH viSha aadi naasha ukto bhavati | dk 'any poison can be neutralised by 
antidotes, say spells and nostrums...'



SARGA 30
------------------------------

[Text] Rama and Khara exchange a haughty wordy duel and when the demon Khara charges at Rama, Rama eliminates 
him with his all-powerful arrow and gods and sages shower flowery rain. Seetha and Lakshmana return 
from their hiding cave and Seetha becomes very happy on seeing her victorious and indefatigable husband.

Shlok 1: On smashing the mace with arrows Raghava spoke this sentence to Khara smiling him out of temper, without 
assaulting weaponless and flustering Khara, because Rama is the patron of virtue following the protocol 
of righteous war. [3-30-1]

[Commentary] This seems to be a roundabout meaning. But to explain why the epithet dharma vatsala to Rama 
is given, this beating round the bush is necessary. So also, many epithets used in this epic have relevance 
to the circumstances, characters, or their actions. These cannot be explained without the support of 
commentaries, and unfortunately commentaries skip these minor details assuming that the readers are 
capable enough to grasp them in the course of narration, which resulted otherwise at a later time. We 
therefore request pundits to consolidate the relevancy of each the inordinate epithet used to the situations 
narrated somewhere like web, if it is going to cost a fortune on printing and stationary. Explaining 
them occasionally is unnoticed, and they appear to be redundant metre fillers in these days where Sanskrit 
itself has become an alienated language.

Shlok 2: "So, this is all the strength of yours and your army that is displayed and nothing more to display, 
is it! You wretched demon, it is paltriest compared to my strength, yet you vaunt aloud futilely! [3-30-2]

Shlok 3: "This mace of yours in which you repose your bombastic aplomb, now completely battered with my arrows 
has gone onto the surface of earth, so also is your vanity. [3-30-3]

Shlok 4: "What that is said by you, 'I will dab the tears of the demons whose kinfolk are dead here...' even 
this word of yours is a fake. [3-30-4]

Shlok 5: "In boasting you are knavish, in character roguish, and in behaviour ghoulish, such a demon as you are, 
I will take your life away as the Divine Eagle Garuda took away Ambrosia. [3-30-5]

Shlok 6: "Now, my arrows will rip and chop off your throat, and then the earth will guzzle the blood gushed therefrom 
garnished with froth and foam. [3-30-6]

Shlok 7: "You will go to eternal sleep embracing the earth as you embrace an un-gainable lady, when both of your 
arms are knocked down to slide on earth, and limbs smeared with dirt. [3-30-7]

Shlok 8: "While you are in profound sleep, oh, notorious demon, this Dandaka forest becomes a shelter to the 
shelter-worthy sages and saints. [3-30-8]

Shlok 9: "When the strongholds of demons in your Janasthaana are ruined with my arrows, the sages in this forest 
will move about everywhere, fearlessly. [3-30-9]

Shlok 10: "The demonesses who terrorized others so far will be pitiably terrorised now, and they flee away very 
quickly with tear-wet faces as their kinsmen are killed. [3-30-10]

Shlok 11: "To which demonesses your kind of grievous demon is the husband, they must have taken birth in a befittingly 
grievous family like that of yours, and must be well-matched to you in grievous atrocities, and though 
they might not have tasted a grievous situation so far, since their lives have become meaningless, now 
they will become the enjoyers of the empathy of grief. [3-30-11]

Shlok 12: "You are atrocious in conduct because you countervail against Veda-s, debased by conscience because 
you counteract to Vedic rituals, and you are countermanding Vedic procedures because you have always 
been bothersome to Brahmans, and those Brahmans becoming sceptical of your deeds of hindrance, they 
are hesitatingly consigning oblations into Ritual-Fire, which are to be swiftly dropped into fire to 
the chants of hymns and even on time, hence you are countervailing against Veda-s and counteracting 
to their rituals, and countermanding their procedures." Thus Rama spoke to Khara irefully. [3-30-12]

Shlok 13: While Raghava is speaking that way with such an impetuosity in that forest, Khara started to intimidate 
him rancorously in a voice stridulous than braying. [3-30-13]

Shlok 14: "Priding yourself resolutely you are unfearing even in a fearful situation, thereby you have indeed 
gone into the control of death, and for sure you are unmindful of what is speakable and what is not." 
Thus, Khara started his tongue-lashing. [3-30-14]

Shlok 15: "Such of those men on whom the Lead of the Time verily closes in, they will not know what is to be done 
and what not, for all of their six senses will be rendered insensible." Thus Khara intimidated Rama. 
[3-30-15]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: For the above three verses it said: evam bruvaaNam raamam 'to Rama who saying 
that way...' mR^ityu vashya kharaH 'Khara going under the control of Death...' is saying 'oh, 
Rama...' tvam vaacya a+vaacya na budhyase iti 'you know not what to speak and what not to speak 
- to a dying creature like me, because that creature's six-senses are stand-still...' Then why is this
nirbhartsayana, roSa? 'threatening me, and anger at me?' 'Because the faculties of that dying 
creatures, presently mine, will be in a flux, they will attack anyone verbally or physically, let alone 
the Almighty... thus you are not able to distinguish between what is to be done or not to be done with 
such a senseless creature... So, what you have to do now is to finish me, and what is not to be done 
is this sermonising. Why not finish me off from this curse and accord salvation?' Maheshvara Tiirtha.
anena maraNa samaye janaanaam buddhi bhramsho bhavati iti sUchitam - dk 'at the time of death 
people's mind deranges...'

Shlok 16- 17a: Saying so to Rama that nightwalker Khara then knitting his brows tightly saw everywhere for an assault 
weapon for use in that combat, and then he indeed found one not far away from him, namely a huge saala 
tree. [3-30-16, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18: He curled his lips in frown and started to extricate that Saala tree, and that great-mighty Khara on 
forcefully uprooting that tree with both of hands hurled it aiming at Rama, braying loudly and shouting 
at him 'you are dead...' [3-30-17b, 18]

Shlok 19: But that adventurous Rama on shredding that tree which is swooping down with a torrent of arrows, and 
deciding to eliminate that Khara in that war evoked an unusual rancour, which rancour is equally an 
unusual facet of Rama. [3-30-19]

[Commentary] The inveterate bitterness of Rama is to see the unyielding Khara at a time when all of his war paraphernalia 
is lost, but still trying to be aggressive, rancorously.

Shlok 20: Rama whose body is perspiring and whose eyes are acrimoniously bloodshot at ends, he utterly shredded 
Khara with a thousand arrows in that war. [3-30-20]

Shlok 21: Copious frothy blood gushed out from the gashes of arrows on the mountainous body of Khara, like the 
rapids on Mt. Prasavana, and it overflowed on earth too. [3-30-21]

[Commentary] Mt. Prasavana is depicted in Kishkindha canto where Rama admires and eulogises the rainy season when 
waiting for Sugreeva's help.

Shlok 22: When Khara is tormented with the arrows of Rama in that conflict he is bedevilled and with his blood 
stinking body he quickly bolted towards that Rama alone. [3-30-22]

Shlok 23: When Khara is descending on boisterously with his body bathed in blood, that adept one in the Science 
of Archery, dhanur veda , the scripture on archery, and that valorous Rama, 
in swiftness lurched a little...say, two or three steps... [3-30-23]

[Commentary] On this back stepping, backtracking, or the scrape Rama took in war, [ scrape - intr. draw back a foot 
in making a clumsy bow; and here without clumsiness of bow]; much discussion is available discussing 
whether Rama can retrace his step or not. It is said that stepping back in war is prohibited for a valorous 
warrior or to the epical hero. sa~Ngraame sa~Nsthaanam anivR^ittiH ca - gautama and many more 
scriptures say this. And a relaxation to such a stance is said: kvacit ati sankaTa viShaye subhaTaanaam 
abhito ayam apasarpaH - vedaanta deshika But here Rama is taking a runner's back-leg and it is 
not to be construed as an act of cowardice. Dharmaakuutam clarifies this as: vasca shatru vadhe 
kaamayamaana raamsya dhanuShi baaNa sandhaana aadi saukaryaartham apasarpaNam raameNa kR^itam bhuuShaNam 
eva na tu duuShaNam | ata eva muule apasarpaNe kR^ita astram eva hetumatvena maharShiNaa upanyastham 
| anantara shlokena khara vadaaya shara sandhaana mokShaNa aadi pratipaadanam upapannam bhavati | bhityaa 
apasarpaNe punaH shara mokSha anupapatto riti | dk 'Wishing to eliminate the demon Rama has taken 
a back step. It is only to have a leeway between his target, arrow, and arrow-flinging place... In the 
verse itself the great-sage Valmiki incorporated words like kR^ita astra that Rama is an exponent 
in archery [keeping some doubting Thomas' in view.] Further, in the next few verses Rama eliminates 
Khara, thus it is not an act of cowardice...'

[Commentary] More so, some scholars hold that this verse has got grammatical glitches, some ancient mms reads this 
verse as, even though this verse too has the word apasarpaNa scrape:
tam aapatantam 
vegena iiptaasyam rudhira plutam | apasR^itya tataH sthaanaat dR^iShTvaa tvarita vikramaH ||

Shlok 24: Then, Rama snatched an arrow which is similar to the Ritual-fire, and secondary only to the ultimate 
missile, namely the Brahma-missile, for the elimination of Khara in war. [3-30-24]

Shlok 25: That particular arrow is made available to Rama through Sage Agastya by the king of gods, namely Indra, 
because Indra is a sensible one about the future course of events, and he is also prosperous in securing 
impossible weaponry, and now Rama fitted such an arrow on his bow and released it towards Khara. [3-30-25]

Shlok 26: That formidable arrow is promptly released on Rama's stretching the bowstring up to his ear, bending 
bow almost to a circularity, and which arrow is thunderous while in egress like the thunder of a thunderbolt, 
and that has come and plunged inthe chest of Khara. [3-30-26]

Shlok 27: Khara fell down on to earth and on being burnt by the radiation of that arrow he is like demon Andhaka, 
who once was very completely burnt by Rudra in Shveta-araNya, the White-forest. [3-30-27]

[Commentary] Andhaka is the son of Danu, the wife of Kashyapa Prajaapati, and her progeny is termed as daanava-s, 
demons. Shiva burns this Andhaka with his Third-eye in Shveta-forest, which is said to be at the confluence 
point of River Kauvery in ocean.

Shlok 28: As with fall of demon Vritta or fall of demon Bala who are eliminated by Indra with his Thunderbolt, 
or as with the collapse of demon Namuchi who is eliminated by the same Indra just with forth or foam, 
Khara too is brought down. [3-30-28]

[Commentary] The demon Namuchi secures a boon from the gods that he may not die by wetness or dryness, so Indra uses 
foam and forth, which are neither wet nor dry, to eliminated him.

Shlok 29- 30a: In this meantime gods gathering along with carana-s drummed celestial drums from all over and showered 
flowers on Rama from all over. [3-30-29, 30a]

Shlok 30b- 31: And those gods and other celestials in their amazement said among themselves that 'in one and half hours, 
say seventy two minutes of this extreme crack-down Rama with his sharp arrows has eradicated fourteen 
thousand guise changing demons, including their chieftains Khara and Duushana. [3-30-30b, 31]

Shlok 32- 33a: "Aha! Surprising is this great deed of Rama, the shrewd-soul, what a valour, what a fortitude, really, 
his valour and fortitude are like those of Vishnu..." Thus saying that way all of those gods have gone 
away as the have come. [3-30-32, 33a]

Shlok 33b- 34a: All the kingly-sages and elite-sages along with Sage Agastya, who as incidentally came here to witness 
the victory of Rama, then on foregathering near at Rama delightedly said this on adoring him. [3-30-33b, 
34a]

Shlok 34b- 35a: "He that great-resplendent one, the controller of demon Paka, and the destroyer of enemy's cities, namely 
Indra, once came to the meritorious hermitage of Sage Sharabhanga only for the purpose such an elimination 
of demons. [3-30-34b, 35a]

Shlok 35b- 36a: "For the purpose of eradicating these demons who are the evildoers by nature and the natural enemies 
to saintly people you are led to this countryside by the great sages with an ideation. [3-30-35b, 36a]

Shlok 36b- 37a: "That which is the task of ours it is accomplished by you, oh, son of Dasharatha, now that Dandaka is 
unimpeded these great-sages will be practising their respective sacred devoirs in it." Thus, the sages 
expressed their thanksgiving. [3-30-36b, 37a]

Shlok 37b- 38a: In the meanwhile the brave Lakshmana exiting from the mountain cave came along with Seetha to their 
hermitage, and he is charmed at the victory of his brother Rama. [3-30-37b, 38a]

Shlok 38b- 39a: And then that brave and victories Rama too came towards hermitage while great-sages reverenced him, 
and he entered the hermitage while Lakshmana came forward to greet him. [3-30-38b, 39a]

Shlok 39b- 40a: And Seetha on seeing her husband, the eliminator of enemies and accorder of happiness to sages, embraced 
her husband Rama, rejoicingly. [3-30-39b, 40a]

Shlok 40: Janaka's daughter Seetha on seeing the hordes of demons eliminated, and even on observing her husband 
is also scatheless, she is all-smiles for him smiling sniggeringly. [3-30-40]

[Commentary] Any wife on seeing her husband returning from a risky journey will embrace her husband delightfully, 
and nothing special about it. But the commentators attach a great significance to this situation.

[Commentary] Firstly Seetha is hR^iSTaa 'exultant...' 
more than happiness. Rama's victory is the cause for that. sati dharmiNi dharmaaH 
'nature will have its own peculiar property...' Rama's victory is the peculiar property
dharmi, and the exultancy caused is its nature dharma.
hR^iSTaa 'exulted' 'thrilling, hair-raising, electrifying' 'as though the 
inner joy is going to outburst trough the skin pores...' Such is the joy of Seetha.

[Commentary] The cause for the extreme exultancy is said next.
Vaidehi, is the daughter of Videha King, Janaka and when she is said so, 
it is remembered that mithila adhipatiH viiraH 'Mithila's king is the bravest 
of the brave...' Thus, she is aware what bravery and victory are, and knowing that she hailed her victorious 
husband, for she is a worthy princess. bhartaaram pariSvaje 'husband, embraced...' 
Is Rama a husband of Seetha or to total Universe? loka bhartaaram suSuveya. 
He is the husband of the total Universe. When she is the mother of all beings in the universe, and when 
her husband protects her progeny from the evildoers, will she not embrace that husband of hers, as well 
as of the Universe? The word bharta 'one who bears...' and this Rama has 
no other burden to bear, except the Universe.

[Commentary] This embracing is pariSvaje, pari sa svaje 
'wholly embraced.' She embraced him from all over and fomented his war-wounds with her warm breasts. 
Then, why for this much happy hugging? It is replied: maharSiiNaam sukha aavaham 
pariSvaje 'one who brought comfort to great-sages, him she embraced...' The great-sages are her 
children, supplicating her to recommend to the Supreme Being to bestow His grace for their salvation. 
Since Rama brought some relief by his paternal affection to these children-like sages, she is happy 
and hugging.

[Commentary] Seetha came out of a mountain cave and embraced Rama. This suggests 
that the innate soul sheSi on the advise of a teacher, after leaving the 
cave-like living being, is released from bondages and embraces the master sheShin. 
This is the same predicament for her in Sundara Kanda, where the teacher Hanuma advises her to come 
with him, but she refuses, because her lord alone has to come conquering, as he has done now as far 
as her confinement is concerned. Here she is put in cave and guarded by Lakshmana, unlike demonesses 
guarding her in open-air gardens in Lanka. She came out of the cave and is joining her husband. Govindaraja.

[Commentary] Next, Maheshvara Tiirtha records: tam dR^iSTvaa 
shatru hantaaram 'at him Rama, on seeing, enemy, eliminator...'in that compound:
tam 'at him...' that Rama, which one-Rama assumed himself as fourteen thousand 
Rama-s, appearing as each to each demon at the time of war, with his divinely gracious aspect
divya mangala vigraha and eliminated all demons, that Rama she saw.
te tu yaavanta evaa~Nau taavaan tu dadR^ishe sataiH As many demons are 
there, so many Rama-s are there on the battlefield.

[Commentary] tam 'at him...' 'who eliminated fourteen 
thousand demons, single-handedly, , that too in seventy two minutes. These demons are so far undeafted 
even by Indra with all his forces. Rama defeated such demons without any damage to his person,
a + vyayam 'unscathed, undamaged... and very easily also...' at such a 
Rama Seetha saw.

[Commentary] tam 'him' who looks girlish. Seetha 
once said that Rama is girly not only in his looks but also in bravery, perhaps.

raama jaamaataram 
praapya striyam puruSha vigraham Ayodhya Part I, 30-3. When Rama dissuades Seetha from 
coming to forests, Seetha said to Rama, 'my father is the King of Mithila and he may think that you 
have left me behind at Ayodhya unable to protect me in forests... thus my father may also think that 
he got a 'girl' as his son-in-law in you...' Through this is a tongue-in-cheek expression Seetha reminded 
Rama at that situation of his Mohini ruupa 'getup of Mohini...' which he 
assumed at the time of churning Milky Ocean, it is her woomanhood that spoke like that. Though not then, 
even now Rama looks girlishly pleasant, if he is not summoning wrath upon him, as per his attributes,
puNDarika vishaala aksha, somavat priya darshanaH 'lotus-petal-eyed, moon-like-delightful-aspect...' 
And he becomes unsightly, only if angered. Such a girlish Rama has won war, and at him Seetha saw in 
admiration about his mannishness. Now her father Janaka will definitely appreciate his son-in-law Rama. 
King Janaka is a result-oriented king, as said in Gita, 3-20: karmaNi evahi samsiddham 
aasthitaH janakaadayaH 'Janaka and others are involved in self-less- result-oriented deeds...' 
and facing him without results is impossible. Thus Seetha's opinion is 'my father Janaka who is result-oriented 
and self-less in his pursuits, he will now appreciate Rama, since Rama has also accomplished a self-less 
pursuit in saving the sages...'

[Commentary] tam shatru hantaaram 'at him... who 
has annihilated the enemies in war...' as he has annihilated troops and troops of unwieldy demons as 
said at: taiH dhanuu~NShi 
dhvaja agraaNi carmaaNi ca shiraa~Nsi ca || 3-25-21 and at bahuun sa hasta aabharaNaan uuruun kari kara 
upamaan | 3-25-22 [A] and also who later said that he will emerge, as and when needed 
to eradicate vice, as at paritraNaaya saadhuunaam vinaashaaya ca duSkR^itaam - 
Gita: 4-8 And Seetha saw at such an omnipotent Being who is an eliminator of evil.

[Commentary] maharSiNaam sukha aavaham 'for great-sages, 
accorder of comfort...' dR^iSTvaa vaidehii babhuuva 'on seeing Vaidehi 
became...' she became one with herself bhuu sattaayaam. When it is said
aatmaa vai puruSasya daaraa 'wife indeed is the soul of manl...' that soul 
of Rama, namely Seetha is so far in a dilemma, because Rama is a lone-warrior against fourteen-thousand 
demons and his safe return is ambiguous. Now that he remained unhurt, that soul called Seetha, has regained 
her abode in Rama. Then hR^iSTaa pariSvaje 'delightfully embraced...' Maheshvara 
Tiirtha.

[Commentary] Dharmaakuutam also derives the same meanings, but with reference 
to dharma:

[Commentary] siitaa -- anaparaadhi raakShasa jana vadho na ucita iti vaidehii kR^ita pratiShedham api - apyaham jiivitam 
jahyaam tvaam vaa site - iti prakaareNa anaadR^itya - caturdasha sahasraaNi raakShasa -- ekasca raamo 
-- iti R^iShi janaanaam api samshayite uddhe kruurataraan raakShasaan hatvaa - avyatho yo raamaH taadR^ishaH 
paraamR^ishyate -- siitaa -- tathaa ca - shatru hantaaram maharShiNaam sukha aavaham -- iti - avyadham 
iti ca visheShaNaani upapannaani bhavanti -- ata eva ete arthaa uttara slokaabhyaam upasamhR^itaaH

Shlok 41: She whose face is beaming with delight that Seetha, the daughter Janaka, on seeing Rama who has eliminated 
demonic troops, and whom great-sages are worshipping, again embraced him and became rapturous. [3-30-41]



SARGA 31
------------------------------

[Text] A spy of Ravana named Akampana rushes to him to break the news of annihilation of Janasthaana 
			by Rama. He suggests Ravana to abduct Seetha. Because parting with Seetha causes grief to 
			Rama and thereby he dies. On thinking for while, Ravana goes to Mareecha seeking his help 
			in abducting Seetha. Mareecha while explaining Rama's capabilities, reminds us of the incarnations 
			of Vishnu, and advises Ravana to be content with what he has.



This chapter is removed from the critical edition and retained by traditional versions There 
			are discussions on this chapter whether it is the original work or an interpolated one. 
			Some more details are given in the endnote. Akampana's character inevitably has continuity 
			in the war scene at the end.

Shlok 1: Then on going hurriedly from Janasthaana and on speedily entering Lanka Akampana spoke these words to 
Ravana. [3-31-1]

Shlok 2: "Oh, king, many demons positioned in Janasthaana are killed, Khara is also killed in war, and somehow 
I have come here. [3-31-2]

[Commentary] dhvani/allusion: Janasthaana is the castle-gateway to Lanka. Lanka is a city built within its castle-walls 
and it has no countrysides or villages at least, annexing it. If Janasthaana is ruined, Lanka is also 
going ruin soon, because none can crossover the bulwark-like-Janasthaana. raajan 'oh, king of demons...' 
'when demons in Janasthaana are ruined, your kingship gets ruined...' bahavaH 'many...' 'not one or 
two, many demons that are guarding Lanka from Janasthaana are hataaH 'dead...' Then Ravana may ask 'what 
is it Khara doing then?' kharaH ca 'Khara, also' is dead. By this ca 'also' Trishira, Duushana etc., 
are also reported as dead.

Shlok 3: Thus said, then that ten-faced Ravana is infuriated with bloodshot eyes, and as though to burn down 
whole world with his radiance he spoke this to Akampana. [3-31-3]

Shlok 4: "Who is that dead-and-gone that has destroyed my indomitable Janasthaana? Who is it that has indeed 
opted for no recourse in all of the worlds? [3-31-4]

Shlok 5: "Evoking indignation in me it is really impossible for Indra to be happy; even for Kubera - no; for 
Yama - no; why them, even Vishnu cannot be happy. [3-31-5]

Shlok 6: "I am the End-Time for the Time-god himself, I will burn down the Fire-god, and I am capable of conjoining 
Death with the virtue of deathliness. [3-31-6]

Shlok 7: "If I am enraged I will incinerate Sun-god or Fire-god just with my radiance, I will halt even the impetuosity 
of Wind-god with that of mine." Thus Ravana said about himself. [3-31-7]

Shlok 8: Akampana with his palms adjoined and voice hesitant with fear sought for the clemency of that decahedral 
demon Ravana who is enraged in that way. [3-31-8]

[Commentary] The words decahedron, decahedral - a solid figure with ten faces - are the fancied usage for Ten-Throated 
or Ten-Faced demon. Ravana has also got the name of dashagriiva, and he is a 'solid' demon.

Shlok 10: When the supremo of demons Dasha-griiva pardoned him then that Akampana spoke these words, unfalteringly 
and trustfully. [3-31-9]

Shlok 10: "He is a youth whose shoulders are mighty, arms round and lengthy, built like that a lion, who is the 
son of Dasharatha and known as Rama. [3-31-10]

Shlok 11: "He is blue-black in complexion, a highly renowned one with matchless might and valour, a magnificent 
one such as he is he slew Duushana along with Khara in Janasthaana." [3-31-11]

Shlok 12: On hearing the words of Akampana, the chief of demons Ravana, spoke these words hissing like a kingly 
serpent. [3-31-12]

Shlok 13: "The question is whether that Rama arrived at Janasthaana associated with Indra and along with all of 
the immortal gods? Oh, Akampana, speak about it. [3-31-13]

Shlok 14: Akampana again detailed about the might and valour of that great souled Rama on hearing that sentence 
of Ravana. [3-31-14]

Shlok 15: "Rama means someone who is highly resplendent, an ablest archer among all archers, one who is endowed 
with divine missiles and divine attributes, and he is the one who conducts warfare with a supreme conduct. 
[3-31-15]

Shlok 16: "And a mighty one with redly eyes and drumbeat like voice, and whose face is shiny like the full-moon 
is Rama's selfsame younger brother known as Lakshmana. [3-31-16]

Shlok 17: "Alike the wind associating with fire this Lakshmana is associated with that glorious and nonpareil 
prince Rama, and that firestorm, namely Rama, destroyed Janasthaana. [3-31-17]

Shlok 18- 19a: "They are not any great souled gods or any heavenly beings as such, hence there is no need to doubt 
about it. Rama unloosened his gold-finned and feather-winged arrows, which on becoming five-faced serpents 
started consuming the demons. [3-31-18]

Shlok 19b- 20: "To whichever nook those demons smitten by fear of those serpent-like are fleeing, they have seeing 
Rama alone standing afore them in that corner, and oh, merited king Ravana, in this way your Janasthaana 
is totally ruined by that Rama. [3-31-19b, 20] [3-31-19]

[Commentary] Rama appeared to have assumed fourteen-thousand forms of one Rama svecChaa gR^ihiita dehaiH, and appeared 
confronting on the path of each and every demon who is trying to take shelter in a corner. Rama further 
appeared in each of the objects the demons wanted to pick up and fight back, say trees, boulders etc. 
raamam eva agrataH sthitam pashyanti - Tiirtha. Because the demons are smitten by fear, that fear reflected 
one Rama as fourteen thousand Rama-s, and it is not any divine trick or magic done by Rama. - Govindaraja. 
It is same with Kamsa in Bhaagavata when he sees one Krishna as many Krishna-s in his fear.

Shlok 21: On hearing the words of Akampana Ravana said these words, "I will to go to Janasthaana to kill Rama 
along with Lakshmana." [3-31-21]

Shlok 22: When Ravana said so then Akampana said these words in reply, " listen, oh, king, what all has happened, 
and of what in actuality is Rama's spirit and grit. [3-31-22]

[Commentary] Akampana is saying that what all has happened to the dead demons is in accordance with their deeds done 
when they are alive yathaa vR^ittam 'as they have done inhuman deeds thus they got punishment.' These 
dead demons are the actual troublemakers to the sages at the behest of Ravana.
yadaa na 
khalu yaj~nasya vighna kartaa mahaabalaH || 1-20-18 As said by Sage Vishvamitra, Ravana 
does not cause any hindrances to ritual, but these hench-demons do. So, they reaped the fruits of their 
actions. Or, raamasya vR^ittam: itihaasa puraaNa prakiirtita vR^ittam 'that which is enshrined in legends 
and mythology, I will tell those aspects of Rama.' yathaa vat balam pauruSam 'as it is his might and 
grit...' 'I will let you know about them...' So said Akampana to Ravana. - Tiirtha.

Shlok 23: "Rama, the highly renolwned, is invincible just by braving against him, for that Rama in fury can stall 
the onrush of a plethoric river with his arrows. [3-31-23]

[Commentary] Rama does not tolerate the upheaval of the system thus he becomes infuriated kupitaH as and when anything 
unwarranted occurs. And this fury is a getup to Rama, but it is not his innate nature because ramayate 
iti raamaH 'he who delights is Rama...' Thus he cannot always become furious. He is invincible just by 
brute-force vikrameNa a+saadhyaH . Thus he is approachable only in accordance with a set system 
conduct. Further, the word a+saadhya is not coupled with any other sub-words upapada, so he is invincible 
even to Brahma, Rudra, Indra et al. By this Vishnu's trivikrama incarnation is indicated. He can stop, 
or bifurcate the plethoric river stream just by his intention, leave alone arrows.
bhayaanaka 
aavarta shataakulaa nadii maargam dadau sindhuH iha shriyaH pateH -- bhaagavata In Bhaagavata 
the tumultuous river gave way to carry Krishna to go to the other side. Thus the incarnation of Krishna, in 
earlier times, or in the forthcoming eras, is suggested. - Tiirtha. As a river gives way to fishes to 
swim, his matsya 'Fish...' incarnation is also suggested.

Shlok 24: "That magnificent Rama can collapse even the firmament along with its starlets, stars and planets, and 
he even can elevate the earth if it were to collapse. [3-31-24]

[Commentary] By the attributes of stars and planets to the firmament, the Golden-Egg hiraNya garbha is suggested. 
So, he is the Originator. In the incarnation as vikrama 'Dwarf-boy...' he set one of his feet on the 
yonder blue, hence the firmament has no value for him. siidantii mahiim uddharet Raising the sinking 
earth is suggestive of varaaha 'Wild Boar...' incarnation, where he uplifted drowning earth on the snoot 
of a wild boar. And again siidantii mahiim uddharet where mahi is taken as people, and it is said 'when 
people on earth are sinking/collapsing under tyranny, he uplifts them...' as he is the ultimate absolver 
and terminator of the creation. Govindaraja and Tiirtha.

Shlok 25: "On breaching the shoreline of the ocean with his arrows that lord Rama can deluge worlds, and he can 
stem the tide of turbulent ocean, or can even stall the agent of that turbulence, namely the wind. [3-31-25]

[Commentary] The deluging worlds suggest samkarSaNa aspect. Govindaraja. Because he deluges all the worlds, he is 
yuga antakaH 'the epoch-ender...' The said 'Air' suggests other elements also, like Fire, Water etc., 
as said in pR^idvii apsu liiyate, aapaH tejasa liiyate 'earth merges in waters, waters merges in fire...' 
thus he can stem the tide of all the elements, taking samhR^itya from the next verse. Tiirtha.

Shlok 26: "That great valorous and the ablest among humans is capable to destroy all the worlds with his valour, 
and even capable of creating the people again.



Or, again dissolving all the worlds into himself, that great contemplator who transcends all is even 
capable of creating the creation again from out of him. [3-31-26]

[Commentary] The word shR^STi does not mean crafting anything anew. It is from sR^ij 'releasing out...' The innate 
souls jiiva are not created anew, they are ever there. But they emerge out of Brahman and resolve in 
Him according to their karmic cycle. This is Gita's concept. He 'creates worlds again...' indicates 
that in earlier eras also he is the Creator. vikrameNa is not always 'by valorousness' but 'just by 
contemplation...' He can create, rather evolve from his within, because he is mahaa yashaH 'glorious...' 
since Veda-s say eko ha vai naaraayaNa, paraa asya shakti, etasya vaa a ksharasya How a 
single being can do all 
these thing? For this it is said saH shreSThaH puruSaH 'he is more than, better than, transcendent, 
to humans...' but not 'best among men' as routinely said above. The word punaH 'again' is used twice, 
one belongs to the earlier dissolutions and creations and another to the forthcoming ones. Tiirtha.

Shlok 27: "Oh, Dashagriiva, it is impossible to conquer that Rama in war for your, either singly or along with 
the hosts of the demon-supporters of yours, as one heaven cannot be won by many sinners. [3-31-27]

[Commentary] Ravana may question this spy as, 'When I am a ten-headed-demon, and he is single headed-human, why cannot 
I conquer him? The reply is 'you cannot, because you have only ten heads whereas each of the two brothers 
has sahasra shiirSaa puruSa, sahasra aksha... 'thousands of heads and thousands of eyes...' They are 
invincible whether you attack him singly or along with hosts of other sinister demons of your like, 
namely Namuchi, Hiranayakashyapa, Shambara et al. No one can conquer him. The analogy is like this. 
Though there are many sinners in many worlds, all put together are not able to conquer one single heaven. 
Tiirtha. anena paapiShThaiH 
svargaH praaptum na shakyata iti uktam - - anena sukR^itinaam svargaH paapiShThaanaam naraka iti suucitam 
- dk .

Shlok 28: "I do not think that he is killable even for all god and demons, and this is the idea to kill him, and 
to this you may listen attentively. [3-31-28]

[Commentary] The 'gods and demons...' is said in plural, deva asuraiH even then sarva 'all' is also incorporated. 
This is to say that even in the forthcoming eras also he is invincible. Then the spy says an unasked 
for opinion, aham manye: ----  'I admit... that he is unkillable... though I belong to the clan of demons, 
on seeing Rama's valour in person, some wisdom dawned on me by the merit of my earlier births, but you 
are not able to open your eyes as yet, because you are still a stupid...' aasuriim yonim aapanaa muuDhaa 
janmani janmani... Gita 16-20. Tirtha.

[Commentary] Sage Valmiki is speaking through the tongue of this Akampana, the spy, about the invincibility of Rama. 
Govindaraja.

Shlok 29: "An excellent woman in the world is there, a youthful one with symmetrical limbs, a jewel-like lady 
adorned with jewellery, that slender-waisted one who is known as Seetha is his wife. [3-31-29]

Shlok 30: "No goddess can be likened to that mature lady; a gandharva female - no; a apsara female - no; a pannaga 
female -no, then how can there be a woman of her like? [3-31-30]

Shlok 31: "You forcefully abduct his wife when she is in solitude, and indeed Rama will not exist reft of Seetha." 
Akampana advised Ravana in this way. [3-31-31]

[Commentary] Govindaraja says that this Akampana is talking like an enlightened sage, and Maheshvara Tiirtha says 
that a divine wisdom has dawned on this spy just now. Then the question that arises is: How a sagacious 
spy prompted Ravana to abduct Seetha? There are two answers for this.

[Commentary] 1. Any employee is a half-slave to his master, artha daasaa janaaH sarve as the money paid makes one 
a slave of the payer. This spy prompted Ravana in that way because he knows that Ravana is womaniser. 
Like-king-like-subjects yathaa raajaa tathaa prajaaH thus great-demons think alike. Further Ravana did 
not ask for the triggering point for the elimination of these many demons. If Ravana questions about 
it, Akampana had to say that Ravana's own sister Shuurpanakha wanted to debauch. Then Ravana's rage 
multiplies and he may even kill Akampana.

[Commentary] 2. All the sages, including Agastya, have declared to Rama that they have planned to bring Rama to Janasthaana 
only to eliminate the demons at Janasthaana and going further from Janasthaana to Lanka and eliminating 
Ravana is Rama's headache. Which happens owing to Seetha. aaniitaH 
tvam imam desham upaayena maharShibhiH || 3-30-35 Thus this sagacious Akampana is plotting 
to bring Seetha firstly, for whom Rama comes conquering Ravana, and then the demons on earth will be 
eradicated. Without Janasthaana Lanka is nothing but an open-door castle. So, the sages paved way for 
Rama through Janasthaana to Lanka.

Shlok 32: The chief of demons Ravana favouring that idea thought of it and that mighty armed Ravana then spoke 
to Akampana. [3-31-32]

Shlok 33: "Agreed! I wish to go alone early in the morning with a charioteer and I delightfully wish to lead Vaidehi 
into the elegant city Lanka." Ravana declared that way. [3-31-33]

Shlok 34: Saying so Ravana journeyed in a chariot that is yoked with mule-like horses, and that has the dazzling 
of the sun, whereby all the directions are made to glitter. [3-31-34]

Shlok 35: That opalescent chariot of the lord of demons while speedily progressing through starry way shone forth 
as if it is the moon in clouds. [3-31-35]

Shlok 36: On going to the hermitage of Maareecha which is at a distant place Maareecha the son of Tataka received 
Ravana and venerated that king of demons with sweetmeats and savouries that are unavailable to humans. 
[3-31-36]

[Commentary] The food items bhakshya are the supplementary items like laddu-s, jilebi, etc., and the like, whereas 
the bhojya items are boiled-rice, wheat-bread etc., the staple food items. The word a+maanuSaiH may 
also mean 'inhuman' but nowhere we find Ravana taking such a lowly food.

Shlok 37: Offering proper seat and water for washing feet and hands Maareecha personally attended Ravana and spoke 
to him this sentence that is worded meaningfully. [3-31-37]

Shlok 38: "Oh, king and supremo of demons, I am anxious to know whether everything safe and secure to the inhabitants 
of your kingdom, for I am not in the know of the reason by which now you have come here rushingly. [3-31-38]

Shlok 39: When Maareecha said so to him that greatly radiant one who is a sententious speaker that Ravana thereafter 
spoke this sentence. [3-31-39]

Shlok 40: "Oh, sire, Rama who is indefatigable in warring has ruined my security stationed at Janasthaana, and 
in war he even brought down all of Janasthaana which is undefeatable so far, such as I am, to me you 
have to render friendly help in kidnapping Rama's wife." [3-31-40]

Shlok 41a- 42: On hearing the words of that chief of demons, Maareecha spoke these words, "who broached the subject 
of Seetha with you, an enemy in the fakery of a friend? Oh, tigerly demon, who is that censurable one 
that is unhappy with you, since he is giving such a self-ruinous advise? [3-31-42]

Shlok 43: " 'Seetha may be brought to Lanka...' who said it, say him to me, who is that one desiring to cut off 
the prominence of all the demons in all worlds in saying so?



"Who is desirous of getting a zenithal demon ruling all the three worlds to be cut-off when he said 
that Seetha shall be brought to Lanka?



"Who is saying that Seetha is to be brought to Lanka with a desire to get your apogeal ten-heads that 
are prominent among all the clansmen of demons to be cut-off? [3-31-43]

Shlok 44: "Also, he who has motivated you in this way is an undoubted enemy of yours, for he wanted to extricate 
the fangs of a snake from its mouth, of course, through you. [3-31-44]

Shlok 45: "By whom and by which purpose of his you are made to blunder upon this awry path, oh, king, it is as 
good as his hitting hard on your head while you are fast asleep. [3-31-45]

Shlok 46: "Oh, Ravana, it will be unbefitting to raise an eye to see Rama in war, who will be then like a majestic 
elephant that has an impeccable dynasty and bloodline as its mammoth trunk, personal radiance as its 
indomitable might, very firm pair of arms as its pernicious tusks, more so, who will be with the redolence 
of the irrepressible lineage of Raghava-s. [3-31-46]

Shlok 47: "To be in the midst of war itself is the fury of that lion called Rama, by which that lion raises its 
tail touching the back of its trunk, that lion is all-inclusive with forelegs, paws, and claws that 
are included in arrows, while its fangs are swords, and it is the killer of the deer called the expert 
killer-demons, and mind you, do not dare to rouse that sleeping man-lion. [3-31-47]

[Commentary] The nara-simha, man-lion incarnation is suggested here.

Shlok 48: "His bow is crocodilian, his shoulder-speed is quagmire, his arrows are tidal, and the great immensity 
of his war itself is a tideland, and oh, king of demons, it is inapt of you to slide down into the much-ghoulish 
mouth of that abyssal ocean, called Rama. [3-31-48]

[Commentary] The crocodile catches at the very moment of falling of its prey, the arrows make one to sink into a 
quagmire without any hope of coming up, and when the arrows once discharged tidally, the battlefield 
becomes a tideland inundated with his arrows. Thus, it is impossible to crossover that oceanic netherworld, 
called Rama. Tiirtha.

Shlok 49: "Oh, lord of Lanka, be appeased towards Rama, be quietened and gently proceed to Lanka. You take delight 
in your wives, and let Rama be delighting with wife in forests." Thus Mareecha spoke to Ravana. [3-31-49]

[Commentary] Suffix: 'forgive what has happened, remit a disastrous war on Lanka, be pleased with what you have and 
be content with it, holdback your greediness...'

Shlok 50: When thus said by Maareecha that ten faced Ravana returned to his city Lanka and entered his best house 
and home. [3-31-50]

[Commentary] This chapter is a scarecrow to the aesthetics of Ramayana and 
a milestone to commentators of Ramayana. We usually find in Ramayana spectacular entrances for cities, 
characters, and situations. Before such a fantastic entrance of Ravana, for which a full sarga/chapter 
is allotted, this chapter is said to be a glaring hurdle. In here, this Akampana is glorified as a sagacious 
person, yet he gives advise to Ravana to abduct Seetha. This advice is said to contain the setting of 
the ultimate war-field in Lanka. But, the weight of the very same advise by Shuurpanakha is lost to 
this of a spy. Shuurpanakha's intent is very clear, but the meaning, purpose and the achievement of 
this spy is very unclear, except to that which is said by commentators.

[Commentary] Ravana on going to Maareecha, and hearing all indirect puraNa-s 
'mythologies...' returns to Lanka as a gentleman. If he were to be this gentle, Ramayana would not be 
there. But Maheshvara Tiirtha, the commentator says:
ata eva 
raavaNasya siitaa raama bhR^ityatvena taa uddisya tena vakShyamaaNaani baahya dR^iShTyaa durbhaaShaNa 
vat pratiiyamaanaani api vaakyaani - - vastutaH stuti paraaNi eva  'Though the utterances 
of Ravana apparently mean as vile, but their subtext is that of a devotee of Vishnu. -- Maheshvara 
Tiirtha

[Commentary] If Ravana is a true devotee, basing on many mythologies and sub-mythologies, 
the way in which he treated Seetha in Lanka is evident and it pictures him as a clear-cut villain. Thus 
says another commentator, namely Rama Tilaka, whose aim is to elicit literary values of Ramayana, 
and who dismisses all 
this hyperboling. Whether this chapter is interpolated or original, this is included in traditional versions, and 
hence it is to be sincerely incorporated here, because commentators have said a lot about it. So goes the 
tradition.



SARGA 32
------------------------------

[Text] The pomp and pageantry of Ravana is portrayed along with his idiosyncrasy and individuality, his triumphs 
and victories, his jalousies and covetousness. Shuurpanakha approaches him to inform of her fate at 
the hand of Lakshmana.

Shlok 1- 2: On seeing the fourteen thousands demons of heinous crimes, and even on seeing Trishira, Duushana, and 
even Khara, who are all exterminated by lone Rama, then Shuurpanakha emitted a thunderous blare like 
a thundercloud. [3-32-1, 2]

Shlok 3: Highly agitated to witness the deed done by Rama, which deed is highly impossible for others, she hurried 
Lanka ruled by Ravana. [3-32-3]

Shlok 4: She saw Ravana who is fulgent with his own radiance, seated with ministers at his nearby in the midst 
of the divine aircraft Pushpaka, as with Indra who will be sitting amidst wind-gods. [3-32-4]

[Commentary] The place where Ravana is sitting can be said as 'at the top floor of a multi-storeyed building...' 
as the word vimaana means 'atop...' of a house, temple-towers etc. But it can also be said Pushpaka 
aircraft as said in Dharmaakuutam: tatra 
ca vicitra vimaana madhyage kaancana maya aasane - -

[Commentary] The words upa upa viSTa 'the ministers are sitting near him, and are in attendance upon him...' by the 
use of extra preposition upa, but in the course of time the idea of 'nearness or proximity' are lost 
and it came be used as just 'sitting...' Thus, the tautological tendencies were influencing Sanskrit' 
- Pt. Satya Vrat in Ramayana - A Linguistic Study.

Shlok 5: Seated similar to the Sun in firmament on a supreme golden throne, which resembles a golden Altar of 
Fire, and he himself resembling the blazing Ritual-fire spurting out of it when that Golden-Fire-Altar 
is drenched with plentiful ghee, she saw such a Ravana. [3-32-5]

[Commentary] Ravana is seated similar to the Sun in firmament on a supreme golden throne, which resembles a golden 
Fire-altar, laid with golden bricks. Mud-bricks will be used in Vedic-rituals in ordinary fashion, while 
he is a special fire in a special golden altar. When much ghee is poured into that Golden-Fire-Altar 
continually, it is natural for the fire to blurt up, so also Ravana is flaring up when his needs are 
oblated in that fire, and his glow is heightening with every pour of ghee-oblation, rather fulfilment 
of each need.

[Commentary] On conquering all the worlds Ravana assumed indratva 'Indra-hood.' So all the oblations in rituals shall 
belong to Ravana. Any ritual other than this variety will be hindered or spoiled by this demon group. 
This is the real problem of all the celestials, as they are not getting their due of oblations through 
Vedic-rituals. Ravana's throne, rather the seat of authority, itself is the Golden-Ritual-Altar of its 
kind, and every praise, or extolment of Ravana is a hymn in his eulogy, and any offering made anywhere 
in his jurisdiction is an offering made into that Ravana-Fire-Altar. That absolute power of Ravana is 
making him to glow to the bedazzlement of all the worlds. And how he got that Indrahood is said next.

Shlok 6: An invincible one either for gods or gandharva-s, or to sages with exalted souls, or even to any other 
entity worth its name, whose appearance itself is catastrophic, and who is sitting identical to the 
Terminator, as though that Terminator himself is sitting with a wide gaped mouth, at such a Ravana Shuurpanakha 
saw. [3-32-6]

Shlok 7: One who is severally bruised in several combats of gods and demons with the thunderbolts from the Vajra 
weapon of Indra, and one who is severally blotched on his chest when the prongs of the tusks of Airavata, 
the lordly elephant of Indra, gored his chest, at such a Ravana Shuurpanakha saw. [3-32-7]

Shlok 8: One who has twenty arms, ten faces and a broad chest, and a possessor of all regalia of Indra like white 
parasol, white fanning instruments, colours and the like insigne, and at that brave one who is attributed 
with all of the kingly attributes, Shuurpanakha saw. [3-32-8]

[Commentary] Ravana is said to have four legs also in naaradiiya jaimini Ramayana: dasha aasyam viMshati bhujam bhinna 
anjana cayamopamam | paadaiH catur ati ugram taamroSTam 11 chapter, 75 verse. In Raghuvamsha in 18th 
chapter bhujamuurthoru baahulyaa dekopidhana daanuja etc., but not vividly portrayed elsewhere.

Shlok 9: Blent with the gleam of Lapis gems studded in his ornaments his glisten is alike that gem, while 
his ear-knobs are made out of refined gold, and his arms strongish, teeth whitish, mouth widish and 
he is mountainous, and Shuurpanakha saw such a Ravana. [3-32-9]

Shlok 10: His body bears hundreds of welts caused when assaulted with Vishnu-disc for hundreds of times in wars 
with gods, and when assaulted for hundreds of times with the other assaults-missiles in other gruesome 
wars as well, and Shuurpanakha saw at such a Ravana. [3-32-10]

[Commentary] The disc of Vishnu here does not mean the sudarshana cakra of Vishnu. This is yet another missile which 
is one among many given to Rama by Vishvamitra. This sudarshana cakra is a 'thought of Vishnu to eliminate 
the vice...' sankalpa, a conceptually symbolic missile in one of his hands. But in the core of its essence 
it is no disc with any sprockets and central thumb-hole etc.
praaNo mayaa 
kriyaa shaktiH | bhaava unmeSha udyamaH | sudarshanam ca sa~NkalpaH | shabdaa paryaaya vaacakaaH -- 
ahirbuj~na vaakya 'sudarshana is my causative thinking, words are just alternatives --  ahirbudhnya aphorisms. This narration is to portray that Ravana has war-wounds on all over his limbs. 
Though hit by Thunderbolts or missiles for umpteen times, he is just wounded but not dead and he is 
on such a winning spree, ineradicably.

Shlok 11: Likewise, whose limbs are thrashed with thrashing missilery of all gods, whereby his body and soul have 
become harsh, thus he can perpetrate anything swiftly at his will, and he who can capably roil an un-perturbable 
ocean at his wish, at such Ravana Shuurpanakha saw. [3-32-11]

Shlok 12: At him who is a volleyer of mountain peaks, a represser of gods, an extirpator of ethical values, and 
a molester of others wives, Shuurpanakha saw. [3-32-12]

Shlok 13- 14a: He who is a marksman of every divine missile, and an ever interdictor of Vedic-rituals, and who on going 
to the city named Bhogavati, the capital of Naga-s, and on defeating Vaasuki, the King of Serpents, 
has abducted the dear wife of Taksha on molesting her, and Shuurpanakha saw such a molester of others 
wives. [3-32-13, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: On going to Mt. Kailash he who has defeated the god who uses humans as his vehicle, namely Kubera, and 
snatched away his aircraft, namely Pushpaka, which aircraft transits at the wish of its steersman, and 
Shuurpanakha saw such a grabber of others possessions. [3-32-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: He who enviously devastated the divine gardens of Kubera, called Caitraratha, along with a divine Lake 
of Lotuses pertaining to the same Kubera, called Pushkarini, and the gardens of Indra, called Nandana, 
along with other paradisiacal gardens of gods, Shuurpanakha saw such an envious demon. [3-32-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: Shuurpanakha saw him who is similar to the pinnacle of a mountain, and who with his two hands 
forestalls the highly propitious ones that are the stiflers of their enemies, namely the Sun and Moon, when they tend to 
rise. [3-32-16b, 17a]

[Commentary] Tall as a hill that cleaves the sky, / He raised his mighty arms on high / To check the blessed moon, 
and stay / The rising of the Lord of Day. - Griffith.

Shlok 17b- 18a: That courageous one who in early times has practised ascesis for ten thousand years in a great-forest, 
and who on accomplishing it has dedicated ten of his heads to the Self-Created Brahma, she saw such 
a Ravana with such ten heads. [3-32-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: Whereby, to whom there is an indemnity against death in war at the hand of gods, demons, gandharva-s, 
devils, birds, or reptiles, excepting humans, and Shuurpanakha saw such an unimperilled Ravana. [3-32-18b, 
19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: He who is an extreme-ultraist that expropriates the Soma-juice-oblation form the vessels of oblation 
in Vedic-rituals, which Soma juice-oblation is blest with Vedic-hymns and kept separately by Vedic Brahmans, 
since it is intended and shall belong to Indra and other divinities, and she saw such a plunderer. [3-32-19b, 
20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: He who is such an embezzler of the Vedic-rituals at the time of their culmination, a malicious one, 
and one with cruel acts, a hinderer of Vedic-rituals, or, the slayer of those Brahmans that conduct 
Vedic-rituals contrary to his wishes, and one who is heartless and a rampant demon, who is a delighter 
in the iniquity to the people, at him Shuurpanakha saw. [3-32-20b, 21a]

[Commentary] The problem with Ravana is that nobody shall surpass him or his boons, by conducting various Vedic-rituals, 
appeasing various gods to get better boons, or say 'a boon to kill Ravana' itself. That being his preconceived 
fear he lets none to conduct any Vedic sacrifice. Secondly, he has became one with Indra with the boon 
of Brahma. So, any ritual should be centred on Ravana, not Indra. He is not a routine Brahman slayer 
as he has Brahmanic origin, and his teachers are Brahmans, and the like. But he goes against those Brahmans 
who dare to conduct rituals for Indra and other divinities.

Shlok 21b- 22a: She that demoness Shuurpanakha saw her brother who makes all beings to wail, an alarming one to all 
the worlds, an atrocious one and highly formidable Ravana. [3-32-21b, 22a]

[Commentary] Ravana is the nickname of Dashagriiva, or Dashakantha, or Dashaanana, or Dashakandhara. When Ravana 
tried to lift up Mt. Kailash with his twenty hands, on which Shiva, Parvati, Nandi, and a host of 
pramatha 
gaNa-s are there, Shiva pressed down the Mt. Kailash with his big toe. Then Ravana's twenty hands went 
under Mt. Kailash ehereby he started to yell in pain for a thousand years, terrifying all the worlds. Then, 
as advised by his ministers Ravana extols Shiva in a stotram, danDakam a rhythmical eulogy. That heavily 
worded eulogy is still available in the name of raavaNa kR^ita daNDaka. Then, Shiva releases Ravana's 
hands from under Mt. Kailash and blesses him to be renowned as 'Ravana' then onward. This will be in 
the uttara ramayaNa seventh book. Thus, Ravana is the etymological derivation of the word from the root 
ru 'to make noise or weep...'

[Commentary] The mantra shastra says:-- 

 raama patniim
vanasthaam ninaaya - iti raavaNa 'one who abducted Rama's wife from woodlands...' In another way it is 
raavaNasya 
apatyam pumaan raavaNaH 'Ravana's son is Raavana.'

Shlok 22b- 23a: And at him who is conspicuously sitting on a throne, attired and bejewelled in excellent apparels and 
jewels, shining forth with marvellous garlands, and who is like the Ultimate-Time on the rise destined 
for the Eventual-Time. [3-32-22b, 23a]

Shlok 23b- 24: Demoness Shuurpanakha nearing Ravana, who is the highly fortunate king of demons, an enemy-destroyer 
and a felicity of the dynasty of Sage Pulasta, and who is now surrounded by his ministers, she spoke 
this sentence. [3-32-23b, 24]

Shlok 25: She who is disfigured by the high souled Lakshmana, and who is still perplexed with the fear of Lakshmana 
and her own craving for Rama as well, on displaying her misfortune to everybody that fearless rover 
Shuurpanakha spoke this very caustic sentence to Ravana, whose eyes are broad and burning. [3-32-25]



SARGA 33
------------------------------

[Text] Shuurpanakha taunts Ravana for his un-kingly activities, by which his kingdom is going to 
			face a calamitous situation soon. While gibing at him she narrates how a king, really fit 
			for kingship, shall conduct the affairs of kingdom. She speaks many paradigms on which many 
			commentaries are declined basing on kings and their vices.



This chapter vies with the 33rd chapter of Kishkindha Kanda in the attitudes of a king and 
			his kingship. These two chapters, as detailed by ancient commentators, equally deal with
			raaja niiti shastra 'political science' and there in Kishkindha the only 
			rescue to Sugreeva is Tara, who saves the face of Sugreeva before Lakshmana, whereas in 
			here Ravana has none to come to his aid when chided by Shuurpanakha. Though Shuurpanakha 
			is a sultry and harpy demoness, the Sage Valmiki has put some rational words on her tongue 
			in forewarning Ravana.

Shlok 1: Then that doleful Shuurpanakha spoke these scornful words to Ravana who makes the world to wail in the 
presence of his ministers. [3-33-1]

Shlok 2: "Highly infatuated with lustful gratifications you are incontinent and unchecked, thus you are unobservant 
of a calamitous jeopardy that has surfaced, though you ought to be observant of it as a king. [3-33-2]

Shlok 3: "If a king deports himself in an overly self-assured manner, that too with self-serving motives, and 
clings only to dirty pleasures, he will be unhonoured by people as with a crematory fire. [3-33-3]

[Commentary] For those who are self-centred there will be no fear, no shame.
artha aaturaaNaam 
na gurur na bandhuH | kaama aaturaaNaam na bhayam na lajja | kShudha aaturaaNaam na rucir na pakvam 
| vidya aaturaa Naam na sukham na nidraa -- niiti shaastra 'for money-mongers no venerable 
ones, no relative... for lust-mongers no fear, no shame... for food-mongers no taste, no proper baking... 
for education-mongers, no comfort, no sleep...' morals.

Shlok 4: "The king who will not deal with the concerns of kingdom, in person and on time, he and his kingdom 
and even those concerns of his kingdom will get ruined. [3-33-4]

[Commentary] This can also be expressed as: ssaH taiH kaaryaiH saha raajyena ca vinashyati '...by those very issues 
of kingdom, the king along with his kingdom gets ruined...' because the major issue on hand is Rama 
and Lakshmana and they can ruin Ravana and his kingdom. Inordinate revelling in comforts and lust makes 
a king weak in body, mind, and time. The timely actions he is supposed to take do not come to mind because 
mind is weakened and benumbed. Then he is liable to believe his aids that may precisely land him into 
further troubles. Hence a king / ruler has to take actions and decisions personally, on time, duly remaining 
firm by his body and mind.

Shlok 5: "If a king is inaccessible to spies for exchange of information, unavailable for subjects for an audience 
for a similar appraisal, more so if he is intemperately not able to impose self-discipline, people will 
eschew such a king from a distance as elephants will refrain themselves from the mud of river from a 
distance. [3-33-5]

[Commentary] Shuurpanakha knows that Ravana has spies all around, but she is also in the know that they are worthless 
fellows because they narrate mythologies after every thing is ruined, as was done by Akampana in the 
previous episode. There is none to caution him beforehand excepting herself, that is her confidence. 
So, she is haranguing Ravana to take immediate action, otherwise, there may be a mutiny or cold war 
in his kingdom, and his subjects may desert him during wartime, like Vibheeshana.

Shlok 6: "Which of those kings that will not safeguard their kingdoms by remaining in a self-restrained manner, 
they will not outshine advantageously, like mountains submerged under ocean. [3-33-6]



"Without keeping the kingdom under your personal control, you have shuffled the administration onto 
the ministers and army personnel like Khara, Duushana et al. And these figureheads alone become the 
tiderips, for they quarrel among themselves about the kingship of Lanka after your ruin, and they alone 
are floating like oceanic tides up above your head and thus you are a submerged sovereign. In any way, 
your doom is destined either by Rama, who is an imminent danger, or by your military managers, who are 
the in-built dangers."

[Commentary] Ravana is no doubt mountainous in his wealth and prosperity but he is engulfed in the ocean called promiscuity, 
and as long as those waters of lust tiderip over his head he cannot surface himself.

Shlok 7: "Externally you are belligerent with sensible gods, gandharva-s and other demons, and internally you 
are needful of intelligence agents, and such as you are, you are an erratic even, then how can you thrive 
as a king! [3-33-7]

[Commentary] Your enmity with the sensible gods will make them sensitive to be vigilant. And because there is a lack 
of intelligence or agents to you, added to it there is a lack of your own personal intelligence required 
for a king, and above all there is a lacking in the insistence of real kingship with you. Then, will 
not those gods take opportunity to hit you back, for everything is lacking in you, except lusting?'

Shlok 8: "Your bent is boyish and you are mindless, oh, demon, you are not able to know the knowable danger because 
you are carefree, and how do you thrive as a king! [3-33-8]

Shlok 9: "Oh, so-called best one among triumphant kings, those kings that do not retain spies, treasuries and 
strategies under their control, but vouchsafe them to others, they are of a piece with the peasantry. 
[3-33-9]

Shlok 10: "Oh, titular overlord of humans, only some can be called prescient kings because they see all the situations 
happening distantly through their spies. [3-33-10]

[Commentary] Though the spies bring in various pieces of information they are to be collated and analysed by the 
king. anena caareNa vyavahitaa api arthaa avashyam vicaaraNiiyaa iti suucitam - dk  
'so you neither have those intelligent spies nor the least intelligence required of a 'prescient 
king' thus your doom is certain.'

Shlok 11: "I believe that you have no spies worth their profession, yet you are associated with artless ministers 
worthy to worship you, hence you are incognisant of the ruination of all of your subjects in Janasthaana, 
including Janasthaana. [3-33-11]

Shlok 12: "A single soul called Rama has eliminated fourteen thousand demons of dreadful deeds in Janasthaana, 
even Duushana is killed, even Khara is also killed. [3-33-12]

Shlok 13: "That indefatigable champion Rama gave security to the sages, rendered Dandaka forest safeguarded, and 
he put Janasthaana to rout. [3-33-13]

Shlok 14: "On your part you are but selfish, hotheaded, and others like the appeasers of your lust, or these artless 
ministers, or those underpaid unfaithful spies hold you down, and such as you are, you are unperceptive 
of the calamity rising up against you in your own kingdom. [3-33-14]

Shlok 15: "Should a king be overweening, an under-payer, an improvident, self-conceited, and dubious, all his 
subjects bid goodbye to such a king when he is in strife. [3-33-15]

Shlok 16: "Should a ruler be unduly self-conceited, self-centred, self-adulating and a spitfire too, his own kith 
and kin will ruin him when he is in distress. [3-33-16]

Shlok 17: "That king who does not officiate his good offices, nor un-panicked into panicky situations, he will 
be quickly overthrown from his kingdom, and on becoming a debased individual he will be equated with 
a piece of straw in this world. [3-33-17]

Shlok 18: "Dried sticks, globs or the particles of dust are of some avail, but kings fallen from their position 
are of no avail. [3-33-18]

Shlok 19: "As to how a used up raiment or a crumpled flower-tassel is meaningless, likewise a king derelict from 
his kingdom, though functional, is meaningless. [3-33-19]

Shlok 20: "Which king will be cautious, clever, conscientious, with his controlled senses, and thankful, that 
king survives for a long time. [3-33-20]

Shlok 21: "He who keeps his mental eyes of wariness will be wakeful even though he slept well closing his physical 
eyes and he who will make his fury and favour evident to people without any concealment or cunningness, 
people will highly revere him as a king.



"He who keeps his mental eyes of wariness wakeful even though he sleeps fast closing his physical eyes, 
thus discarded are his fury and frenzy as well, because he knows as to who is to be treated furiously 
and who is to be favoured, and thus people will revere him as a judicious king. [3-33-21]

Shlok 22: "But, oh, Ravana, because you are imprudent you are bereft of these merits, and such as you are, unknown 
is the very great massacre of demons to you, though not personally, but at least through your spies. 
[3-33-22]

Shlok 23: "You are the humiliator of others, you hobnob only with your ravishes, and incognisant of the object 
for apportionment of time and place for your activities, as to when and where and how the things are 
to be dealt with. And, as you are not attending any kingly activity, or do not focus your mind in deciding 
rights and wrongs, thereby your kingdom will get ruined and you will be imperilled, not before long." 
Thus Shuurpanakha declaimed Ravana about his worthlessness as a king. [3-33-23]

[Commentary] However self-sufficient and self-assured a king might be, he cannot underestimate rivalling kings as 
trivial, unilaterally. anena susamR^iddha raajyastho api raajaa etaiH doSaiH aciraat raajya 
bhrSTo bhavati iti - raaj~naa baliSTena api shatru durbala iti avamatiH na kartavyam ca suucitam - 
dk   It is indicated that a king should 
be on his guard lest he will be overthrown, just because that king is associated with many un-kingly 
attitudes.

Shlok 24: In this way when Shuurpanakha extolled only his negative traits, he that lord of night-walkers Ravana, 
who holds only his pride, power and prosperity dear to him, pored them over in his mind and contemplated 
over a time. [3-33-24]



SARGA 34
------------------------------

[Text] Ravana enquires about Rama's valour and weaponry for which Shuurpanakha narrates about Rama, Seetha, 
and Lakshmana and what has happened in Janasthaana. Thus she prompts Ravana to achieve Seetha as his 
wife, for none surpasses Seetha in her beauty.

Shlok 1: On observing Shuurpanakha who is speaking bitter words against him in the presence of ministers then 
Ravana is highly infuriated and queried her. [1-34-1]

Shlok 2: "Who is Rama? How brave he is? Of what mien and what calibre he is? And for what reason he entered the 
highly inscrutable Dandaka forest? [1-34-2]

[Commentary] 'Why this Rama has to come this far to Dandaka instead of loitering somewhere near Himalayas? Has he 
come purposefully with any revenge against us, the demons, or is it a pleasure-trip? Why should he leave 
his ancestral kingdom and enter Dandaka, a stronghold of demons?' This is the real worry of Ravana.
kena ca kaaraNena kula parampara aagatam praajyam raajyam parityajya nikhila nishaacara vaaso asmin 
deshe samaagataH - dk Ravana might be unaware that Dandaka forest also belongs to Ikshvaku-s as 
Kishkindha belonged to them, as said by Rama at the time of eliminating of Vali.

Shlok 3- 4a: "What is the weapon of that Rama by whom these many demons are killed in war, likewise Duushana and 
Trishira are killed, and even the unkillable Khara is killed? Oh, lady with fascinating limbs, who disfigured 
you? That you tell. [1-34-3, 4a]

[Commentary] This can be simple question 'What is his weapon?' without telling round about as above. But Ravana is 
weighing arsenal balance since he is self-content with a giant-robot namely Kumbhakarna, and with a 
brave and all-trickster son Indrajit, along with his own ICBMs, ASMs and ASMs, plus his own invincibility. 
Thereby he is said to be puzzled at arsenal-less Rama and asking:
kaani kaani 
ca aayudhaani khara mukha nishaacra praaNa haani karaaNi - dk'you said that Rama caused 
this havoc single-handedly, then he should have used various and numerous weapons by which missiles 
are flung... because common sense does not permit any belief that a handheld bow can dart numerous arrows 
or missile, that too when wielded by a single human...'

Shlok 4b- 5a: When the king of demons has asked her thus, she that demoness Shuurpanakha who is in a fit of fury then 
commenced to describe Rama in the point of fact. [3-34-4b, 5a]

Shlok 5b- 6a: "Dasharatha's son Rama is the one with inescapable arms and keen-eyed, but has jute-cloths and skin 
of black-deer for his dress, yet in semblance he is similar to the Love-god. [3-34-5b, 6a]

Shlok 6b- 7a: "Yanking out a bow with golden fillets, and that is similar to the bow of Indra in its shine, he strews 
candent iron-arrows that simulate snakes with deadly poison. [3-34-6b, 7a]

Shlok 7b- 8a: "It has become imperceivable for me to me to see when and how he drew his ghastly arrows from quiver 
on the battleground; or, stretching his bow admitting those arrows on bowstring - no; or, his releasing 
those sharp edged arrows from the bow - no; why them, that great mighty Rama himself has become imperceptible 
in the fastness of his action. [3-34-7b, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: "As with a crop of grain devastated by a hailstorm of Indra, I could only see that best army while it 
is being annihilated with a downpour of arrows. [3-34-8b, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10: "Thus a lone foot-soldier with his excruciating arrows has exterminated fourteen thousand demons with 
fiendish might, including Duushana, and along withKhara, say, within one and half hours. [3-34-9b,10]

[Commentary] The above is consolidated and said as: saH ayam 
adhunaa muni jana samucita veShopi dhik kR^ita shakra paraakrame vikrameNa shakra kaarmuka sadR^ikSham 
caapam aakR^iShya mahaa viShaan aashii viShaan iva rukma punkhaan anukShaNam prakShipan rakSho vikShobhakaram 
ati bhayankaram ruupam aavahati - dk.

Shlok 11: "Accorded is the protection to the sages, and Dandaka is made as a snuggest place for them. I am the 
lone one somehow let off by such a high-minded Rama, of course, on humiliating me by cutting my nose 
and ears. Maybe, it is because he is hesitant of woman-slaughter for he is a well-versed soul. [1-34-11, 
12]

[Commentary] Here she twisted the story line to her side, as she edited the scene of her humiliation later to annihilation 
of their army. In Dandaka witch-hunting is over and it is calm and collected now. In fact, Ravana intruded 
into Janasthaana of Dandaka and stationed some army to protect intrusion into Lanka, as his mainstay 
is only the castled city Lanka. Now that the doors to Lanka are wide open Lanka is exposed to an imminent 
danger. nishaacaraan 
asankhyaiH rukma punkhaiH vishikhaiH vimadhya shatamakha mukhamakha bhuje akhila tapasvinaH ca nirbhayam 
vidhaaya danDakaaraNyam api sakala muni jana sharaNyam atanuta - dk.

Shlok 13: "A highly resplendent one who by his trait matches his brother in bravery, an adherent and a devotee 
of his brother, such a stout-hearted one is Rama's brother known as Lakshmana. [1-34-13]

Shlok 14: "That Lakshmana is an easily irritable one, he is not that easily invincible, an easy victor, but not 
an easygoing valiant, yet he is an intellectual at ease, and a mighty one who does not ease off, such 
a Lakshmana is the perpetual right-hand and the peripherally moving life of Rama. [1-34-14]

Shlok 15: "But, one with her broad-eyes, face similar to the full-moon is the dear and wedded wife of Rama, and 
she always takes delight in the well-being of her dear one, namely Rama. [1-34-15]

Shlok 16: "She is the one with lengthy hairdo, her nose and thighs are fine, and that glorious one with fine looks 
is the wife of Rama, and she is beaming forth like a sylvan deity situated in that woodland, who in 
turn is like Goddess Lakshmi in a temporal form. [1-34-16]

Shlok 17: "She has a complexion mathing the shade of refined gold, her nails are rosy and jutting, and she with 
her curvaceous hips and slim waist is the daughter of King of Videha, and known as Seetha. [1-34-17]

Shlok 18: "So far I have not seen any goddess with such a comeliness; a gandharva female - no; a yaksha female 
- no; a kinnara female - no; and a woman, no, not on the face of earth! [1-34-18]

Shlok 19: "To whom Seetha becomes a wife and around whom she gladly throws her arms after such a marriage, he 
lives more grandly than Indra in all the worlds. [1-34-19]

Shlok 20: "She is a highly gracious lady, laudable by her bodily structure, incomparable by her appearance, and 
she will become a seemly wife of yours, and you too will become a best husband of hers. [1-34-20]

Shlok 21- 22a: "Oh, mighty shouldered brother, but when I ventured to bring her as your wife, whose hips are broad, 
bosom fat and bulgy, face excellent, that cruel Lakshmana disfigured me. [1-34-21, 22a]

Shlok 22b- 23a: "You too will become a groveller at the arrows Lover-god in case you now see Vaidehi with a face shining 
like full-moon. [1-34-22, 23a]

Shlok 23b: "Hence, if you hatch an opinion to make her as your wife, and if you aspire success, now itself quickly 
put your best foot, namely your right foot, forward. [1-34-23]

Shlok 24: "Oh, the king of demons Ravana, if this advise of mine is pleasing to you, let this idea be actualised 
without any shilly-shallying in your mind. [1-34-24]

Shlok 25: "Oh, king of the demons, realise your stout-heartedness, and oh, great mighty one, let that immaculately 
limbed Seetha be abducted to become your wife. [1-34-25]

Shlok 26: "On recognising that Rama with his straight shooting arrows destroyed the night-walkers positioned at 
Janasthaana, and further on distinguishing that Duushana, and even Khara, is dispatched, it is apt of 
you to awake to a workable action." Thus Shuurpanakha has earbashed Ravana. [1-34-26]



SARGA 35
------------------------------

[Text] Ravana proceeds to Maareecha seeking his help in the abduction of Seetha. He travels by his aircraft-like 
chariot and on way he sees many locations along the seacoast that are affluent and divine. On seeing 
a banyan tree Ravana recollects the episode of Garuda, the Divine Eagle. He arrives at the hermitage 
of Maareecha.

Shlok 1: On hearing the exciting advise of Shuurpanakha then Ravana bade adieu to ministers, and indeed on resolving 
his further task he proceeded to his personal palace chambers. [3-35-1]

Shlok 2- 3: While following up his thinking about that task he got a pertinent thought, and on deliberating about 
the credits and discredits, strengths and weaknesses of that thought he decided that 'this is to be 
done in this method only.' On taking a decision in that way and with a firm mind he indeed proceeded 
to his excellent vehicle-garage. [3-35-2, 3]

Shlok 4: That lordly demon then has gone to the vehicle garage in secrecy, and directed the charioteer thus as, 
'let the chariot be harnessed.' [3-35-4]

[Commentary] This 'secretly going to his own garage...' is one among the many oddities of Ravana that is suggested 
here. Kings never go to stables or garages but horses or chariots come to their fore, if ordered. Ravana's 
ministers have heard Shuurpanakha's report about the destruction of all the demons in Janasthaana. Because 
they have heard, it will not remain a secret or suppressible fact, but it will spread as a wild fire. 
Then some action has become necessary for Ravana now to save his face. praaNam eva parityajya maanam 
eva abhirakshatu 'Let life go but not the self-respect...' So, his first thinking is to wage a 
war with Rama, but it may become a worthless expedition because Rama's capabilities are partially known. 
Next, he thought to abduct Seetha, for she is said not only to be beautiful but a dearly cherished wife 
of Rama. If Seetha is distracted from Rama, Rama may die anguishing for Seetha, thus this imminent danger, 
called Rama, gets ruined once for all.

[Commentary] The human nature is bhaaryaa duHkham punar bhaaryaa just 'to lament for a parted wife for some 
time till a second wife is secured...' Thus, that wife-addict Rama will lament for Seetha for some time 
and seeks another woman as his wife. Instead, if he starts searching for Seetha alone, it is impossible 
for those two young humans to come searching this far, or to cross the ocean, or to enter Lanka. And 
even on entering Lanka, it is impossible to survive further at the hands of demons. These are some of 
the many of his deliberations on the 'strengths and weaknesses and the credits and discredits...' of 
his thought mentioned in the verse.

[Commentary] Then he enters his beautiful vehicle garage secretly. Why a king shall behave this quirkily? Because 
'walls have ears...' and what all Shuurpanakha barked in the court must be audible throughout the palace 
by now, or may be all over Lanka, and if someone sees Ravana's exit at this point of time, everyone 
despises him, on the charge that he is trying to bring yet another woman. Though it is not said vividly 
here, that he is going to abduct Seetha thievishly keeping his valour and bravery aside, this will be 
made known in the words of Kumbhakarna in Yuddha Kaanda. This is shameful for his own self, as he did 
not do this way on previous occasions. For such a cowardly act, even Ravana's cherished wife Mandodari 
may despise or deride Ravana. So, he came to stables with a quirk of secrecy, which of course, will 
not remain a secret, soon.

Shlok 5: When that brisk-paced charioteer is said in this way he instantly harnessed the favourite and choicest 
chariot of Ravana with horses and got it ready. [3-35-5]

Shlok 6: That chariot which is decorated with golden ornaments, yoked with monster-faced mules that have gem 
studded trappings is rideable by the wish of the rider, and sitting in such a chariot which is wholly 
golden and which rides with a sound like the pealing of thunder, that celebrated Ravana, the brother 
of Kubera and the lord of demons, travelled towards the lord of rivers and rivulets, namely the ocean. 
[3-35-6,7]

Shlok 8: Dasha-aanana, the decahedral demon, whose complexion like the smoothened Lapis-gem is lustrous, whose 
regalia that comprise white long-furred fans, white parasol and the like is spectacular, whose ornaments 
made out of refined gold are glittering, who similar to a kingly mountain with ten pinnacles and crags 
by way of his ten heads and twenty arms is gorgeous, and such a chief of demons who by that way is an 
adversary of gods and cutthroat of eminent-sages, seated in a nitid golden chariot that is rideable 
by the wish of its steersman, he shone forth like a black-cloud fringed with the streaks of lightning 
and rimmed with flights of cranes. [3-35-8, 9, 10]

[Commentary] Here the cloud metaphors with Ravana, the streaks of lightning with the silvery flashes of his regalia, 
and the decorated chariot with the flight of cranes.

Shlok 11: That dauntless Ravana forged ahead while viewing the area along the coastline which is interspersed 
with thousands of mountains and which is with variously flowered and fruited trees. [3-35-11]

Shlok 12: Everywhere the coastland is bedecked with lotus-lakes containing clean and cool waters, and with extensive 
thresholds of hermitages containing Fire-altars. [3-35-12]

Shlok 13: Entire coast is gleaming with banana plantation and glistening with coconut trees, and the saala, palm, 
and tamaala trees are also in full blossom. [3-35-13]

Shlok 14: It is brightened up with thousands of reptiles and birds, with those many celestial beings that frequent 
the earth like gandharva-s, kinnaraa-s. And with eminent sages who have highly controlled food-habits, 
as well. It is also refulgent with the self-denying Siddha-s, Carana-s, and with sages that are the 
brainchildren of Brahma, namely Vaikhanasa-s, Maasha-s, Vaalakhilya-s, Mariicipa-s. [3-35-14, 15]

[Commentary] The details about these sages are given in the 6th chapter of this Aranya Kanda when these categories 
of sages meet Rama requesting protection from demons.

Shlok 16: With thousands of celestial maidens divine in their mien, namely apsara-s, who are prettified with divine 
ornaments and garlands, and who are also the experts in the methodical sex-games that seaside is pervaded. 
[3-35-16]

Shlok 17: That seacoast is adored by the propitious wives of gods and frequented by the assemblages of gods who 
thrive upon ambrosia, and even patronised by demons that strive for ambrosia. [3-35-17]

[Commentary] The demons did not get their share of amR^ita 'divine elixir' therefore they cannot be called
amR^ita ashibhiH 'ambrosia consumers.' As such, some other mms contain this expression 
amR^ita arthibhiH 'desirers of ambrosia...' the demons. They also frequent those coasts along with 
gods.

Shlok 18: It is spread with swans, ruddy-gees and frogs, and there the waterfowls are very noisy, and stones overlain 
on the coast are like lapis-gems, and with the ambience of ocean that whole delta is appearing smooth 
and sludgy. [3-35-18]

Shlok 19- 20: While Ravana, the brother of Kubera, is quickly transiting he saw everywhere the whitish and widish 
aircrafts belonging to the deified souls who acquired higher worlds, and from those aircrafts adorned 
with divine flowery tassels and piloted by the wish of their steersmen, instrumental and vocal music 
is resonating, and gandharva-s are singing and apsara-s are dancing in them. [3-35-19, 20]

Shlok 21: Ravana proceeded while observing thousands of woodlands with sandalwood trees that are soothing and 
satisfying the sense of smell, and that oozed sweet-smelling resin at their bases. [3-35-21]

Shlok 22: He also observed on his way the forests and woodlands containing the noteworthy aloe plants, Takkola 
trees, and the nutmeg trees that are with fruits and aromatic, as well. [3-35-22]

Shlok 23: Also seen are the flowers of Tamaala trees, shrubberies of pepper, and heaps of desiccating pearl-oysters 
along the seashore. [3-35-23]

Shlok 24: Thus, he saw the peaking boulders, like that the reefs of corals, and like that also at the mountains 
that have golden and silvern crests. [3-35-24]

Shlok 25- 26a: On seeing the delightful, serene, and marvellous cascades, and cities that are abundant in wealth and 
agricultural produce, and abundant with gemlike womenfolk, and that are replete with elephants, horses, 
and chariots, Ravana proceeded further. [3-35-25, 26a]

Shlok 26b- 27a: Ravana observed the delta adjacent to seacoast of that kingly ocean to be uniform and smooth, while 
the light air breezing in there is soft for touch, thus it looked heavenly. [3-35-26b, 27a]

[Commentary] The demons did not get their share of amR^ita 'divine elixir' therefore they cannot be 
called amR^ita ashibhiH 'ambrosia consumers.' As such, some other mms contain this 
expression amR^ita arthibhiH 'desirers of ambrosia...' the demons. They also frequent those 
coasts along with gods.

Shlok 27b- 28a: There Ravana also saw a banyan tree which in sheen is like a black-cloud, and the branches of which 
are stretching all over for a hundred yojana-s in length, and on which sages made their abode for practising 
ascesis. [3-35-27b, 28a]

Shlok 28b- 29a: This is the tree on the branch of which once highly mighty Divine Eagle Garuda swooped to perch, clawing 
an elephant and a mammoth tortoise, for the purpose of dining them out on that tree-branch. [3-35-28b, 
29a]

[Commentary] One yojana is 900 miles, where one yojana is nine English miles. The legendary version is that the elephant 
and tortoise are engaged in a fierce fight though none of them is a prey to the other, and seeing them 
and to teach a lesson to such causeless quarrellers, Garuda flies in and claws both and searches for 
a place to feast on them. Finding this tree worthwhile to have a leisure dinner he dashes on to one 
branch.

Shlok 29b- 30a: While descending rapidly then that best bird among birds Garuda suddenly broke that tree's branch which 
is full with leaves, owing to the impact of his high impetuosity. [3-35-29b, 30a]

Shlok 30b- 31a: Adhering to that tree-branch there are eminent sages like, Vaikhanasa-s, Maasha-s, Vaalakhilya-s, Mariicipa-s, 
Aja-s, and even sages like Dhuumraa-s that thrive on fumes and smokes are there, and there they are 
collectively practising asceticism upside down while clasping branches with their legs. [3-35-30b, 31a]

Shlok 31b- 32a: For the sake of the grace of those sages Garuda took flight from that tree, grasping that broken tree-branch 
of a hundred yojana length along with those pendulous sages with his beak, and both of the elephant 
and tortoise with both of his claws. [3-35-31b, 32a]

Shlok 32b- 33: That virtue-souled Garuda consumed the meat of his prays, namely the elephant and the giant tortoise 
with a single foot, and destroyed the province of tribesmen with the same broken tree branch, and thus 
that supreme bird Garuda gained an incomparable happiness in rescuing those great-sages. [3-35-32b, 
33]

[Commentary] Garuda held tortoise and elephant in two claws in the first instance and when to settle down on tree 
branch he transferred one pray from one claw to the other and held both of them by one claw and with 
the other free claw he caught hold of the tree branch. But it broke under his weight, and then suddenly 
without making it to fall on ground he grasped that branch with his beak and took to flight. While flying 
in sky he held both the preys in claw, and the tree branch into the other. Then he started to eat his 
preys in sky with one claw, still upholding the branch from falling. Seeing this feat of Garuda, the 
sages clinging to that tree branch bless him to be successful in his next mission and leave that branch. 
When that tree branch is free from sages, Garuda throws it on a province of some antagonistic tribal 
community, by weight of which the whole of that tribal community is destroyed. This is one way of telling 
the myth.

Shlok 34: When his valour has become twice as much with that happiness that heedful Garuda indeed resolved to 
bring ambrosia from heaven. [3-35-34]

Shlok 35: Smashing the guard of iron-grid completely and crashing the unbreakable diamond -like strongroom in 
which the ambrosia is safeguarded, then Garuda carried off ambrosia from the palace of Indra. [3-35-35]

Shlok 36: Ravana on his way saw such a banyan tree named as Subhadra which is a much sought after tree for assemblages 
of great sages, and which betokens the deeds of that best-winged Garuda. [3-35-36]

Shlok 37: On going to the other side of the lord of rivers, namely ocean, Ravana saw a pleasing hermitage in the 
sacred and scenic interior of the forest. [3-35-37]

Shlok 38: At that place Ravana saw the demon named Maareecha, wearing jute-clothes and black deerskin and tufts 
of hairs, and the one with regulated diet. [3-35-38]

Shlok 39: That demon Maareecha welcomed the king Ravana and customarily entertained him catering all the offerings 
that are beyond the scope of humans. [3-35-39]

Shlok 40: On personally offering meals and drinking water, and venerating him properly Maareecha spoke this sentence 
to Ravana which is connotative of significance. [3-35-40]

Shlok 41: "Oh, king of the demons, is everything well with your Lanka? Oh, king, for what reason you have put 
in an appearance again, that too in a trice? [3-35-41]

[Commentary] This statement contains 'why you have come again?' and taking hold of this word, 'again...' some, who 
hold that the episode of Akampana is justifiable, say that the episode of Akampana is not interpolated 
but the original work of Valmiki. For this, the ex-party says that when a whole of chapter is included, 
inclusion of one word 'again...' is not a bothersome affair to the mythologists or interpolators. When 
it is questioned that interspersing Akampana's episode defeats the spectacular entry of Ravana, the 
defendants say that the antagonists need not be given such priorities. So also, Vali's Kishkindha is 
not portrayed in a spectacular way when Sugreeva attacked Vali for the first time, but it is detailed 
in the second round, to some extent, and fully when Lakshmana enters it.

[Commentary] In this episode, a jump of event to Garuda's exploits may be jerky, but it is questioned when can Ravana 
recollect about Garuda's might, why does he ignore still mightier Vishnu. Ravana's continuous fear for 
Vishnu made him to think of Garuda - that too, on seeing Subhadra, the banyan tree, and that too - while 
going to kidnap Seetha.

[Commentary] The path through which Ravana coursed is towards Himalayas, where an idolatry place called deva 
bhuumi is said to be earmarked for higher souls. When Rama hit Maareecha, he fell far off from 
the ritual place of Vishwamitra. That place is said to be on northern side of Himalayas. Some 
ancient mms contain this verse which also tell about that place as deva bhuumi and it is on 
the northern side of kuru i.e., kurukhsetra where Great War of Maha Bharata 
occurred: uttarËnÃ¾ca 
kurÂ¨n paÃ¾yan paÃ¾yan caiva nagottamËn | deva dËnava sanghaiÃ ca sevitam hi amÂ®ta arthibhiÃ ||

Shlok 42: When Maareecha spoke to him thus, that highly radiant and eloquent Ravana then afterwards spoke this 
sentence to Maareecha. [3-35-42]



SARGA 36
------------------------------

[Text] Ravana seeks Maareecha's help to abduct Seetha. He asks Maareecha to assume the
shape of a golden-deer and lure Seetha, and then Seetha asks Rama and Lakshmana to fetch that
golden-deer. If Rama and Lakshmana are distracted from the hermitage, Ravana can safely abduct
Seetha. Listening to this Maareecha is struck dead, because he is already struck with the arrow of
Rama when he was in Tataka forest. As such, Maareecha tries to explain Ravana about Rama's
quintessence.

Shlok 1: "Give attention to my words as I speak, oh, sire, Maareecha, I am an anguished one,
and when I am in such an anguish you are the ultimate course to me, isn't so." Thus Ravana started
addressing Maareecha. [3-36-1]

Shlok 2- 3- 4: "You are aware as to how my brother Khara, and the mighty armed Duushana, also my
sister Shuurpanakha, and even the highly fiery demon and devourer of raw-flesh Trishira, and even
numerous other night-walking demons who are cocksure of hitting their targets have made Janasthaana
as their residency, and while residing there they put the sages of that great forest that tread a
righteous path to torture, of course, all this as assigned by me. [3-36-2, 3, 4]

Shlok 5: "You are equally aware of the stationing fourteen thousand braving demons in
Janasthaana, who are the followers of the wish of Khara, who are with fiendish exploits, and who
are the troublemakers to the sages of Dandaka forest or to the intruders therein, aren't you.
[3-36-5]

Shlok 6- 7a: "But recently those great mighty demons that are the residents of Janasthaana,
namely Khara and others, preparing themselves inordinately and wielding diverse weapons and
assaulters, for their part had an encounter with Rama in a combat. [3-36-6, 7a]

[Commentary] This episode is narrated in chapter 33, i.e., the episode of Akampana, but there
is a difference in the way of Ravana's narration at this place than the previous one. This is
another point to discuss whether Akampana's episode is an original work or an interpolation.

Shlok 7b- 8a: "With rancour tiding in him, and without making any scathing remark in the least,
that Rama brought his bow into play with arrows in the van of the combat. [3-36-7b, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: "But that foot-soldier, that too, a human, has completely wiped out those
fourteen-thousand demons with flaring fieriness with his fierce arrows. [3-36-8b, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: "Khara is hewed down, Duushana is mowed down, and even Trishira is hacked down,
thereof that Dandaka forest is rendered free from the fear of demons. [3-36-9b, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: "He who is put to flight by his infuriated father, and who came to Dandaka forest
along with his wife, that ignoble Kshatriya is the slaughterer of that demonic army of mine, as his
lifespan is diminished. [3-36-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 12a: "He is out of character, brutal, firestorm, senseless, selfish, one with his senses
unconquered and righteousness discarded, and he is an unrighteous soul just delighting in the
disservice of all beings. [3-36-11b, 12a]

[Commentary] For those who hold Ravana as the devotee of Rama / Vishnu, as one of the two doorkeepers, namely 
Jaya and Vijaya, the above lines of Ravana will become irksome. For that Maheshvara Tiirtha has 
stepped in and gave a commentary that conceives Ravana as a true devotee of Rama.

[Commentary] kruddhaa pitraa nirastaH kim? 'is he necked out by his angry father?' No. To please Kaikeyi 
and the boon given to her by his father, Rama is unhoused. sa bhaarya= sabhaa aaryaH 'in 
assemblages, venerable one.' Rama is one with high esteem. kshiiNa jiivitaH kim? 'is his 
lifespan diminishing? No. He is eternal. kshatriya paamsana= kshatriyaan paati iti kshatriyaH 
paH 'because he protects Kshatriya-s he is a noble Kshatriya, and sa ca asau a.msanaH ca, 
amsana aaghaate 'enemy destroyer,' destroyer of enemies of Kshatriya-s. karkashaH 
'brutal' to enemies, not to adherents, therefore he is: amuurkhaH, alubdhaH: he s 
not senseless, not selfish. adharma aatmaa kim? No, he is not an unrighteous person. And
bhuutaanaam a hite a rataH, 'for beings, in disservice, not, delights': he does not 
delight in the disservice of all created beings.' Thus, he is Supreme Person.

[Commentary] But Rama Tilaka, on the other hand refutes this derivation stating that Ravana is not an out and out 
devotee of Rama, and these many adhyaadhaara-s 'ellipses' need not be brought in to justify 
mythological import to Ramayana. There is a section of pundits that argue Ramayana precedes 18 
puraaNaa-s the 18 mythological treatises, and they refuse to believe that Ravana is NOT a 
devotee of Rama.

[Commentary] In anyway, the innuendo incorporated in certain verses has given rise to diverse commentaries, but 
the unity of Ramayana is kept up, either by Shaivaites or Vaishnavaite or other sects of Hindu 
thinking.

Shlok 12b- 13- 14a: "By whom my sister is disfigured stripping off her nose and ears, that too, without
any enmity but just depending upon his own brawn, I would like to inveigle such a man's nymphean
wife Seetha holding sway on her in Janasthaana, and in that matter I want you to be my aide in
Dandaka forest. [3-36-12b, 13, 14a]

Shlok 14b: "Oh, highly powerful Maareecha, with you and with my brothers standing by my side as
my associates, I indeed care a damn for all of the gods if they are going to wage a war against me,
therefore, oh, demon Maareecha, as you are capable of rendering aid you should indeed become my
aide in this venture. [3-36-14b, 15]

Shlok 16: "In valour, war and verve there is none similar to you, you are a topmost stalwart
in trickery, and a matchless expert in illusive-tricks. [3-36-16]

Shlok 17: "I have come nigh of you only for that reason, oh, nightwalker, and listen to that
deed which you have to do in the course of helping me as I detail you. [3-36-17]

Shlok 18: "On becoming an astounding golden deer with silver dots, you move in front of Seetha
in the hermitage of that Rama. [3-36-18]

Shlok 19: "On seeing you in the shape of a deer, Seetha undoubtedly bids her husband
forthwith, and even Lakshmana, saying, 'lay hold of it.' [3-36-19]

Shlok 20: "Then on the diversion of those two, Rama and Lakshmana, I will comfortably and
unimpededly abduct Seetha in that lonely place, as planet Rahu abducts the shine of moon.
[3-36-20]

Shlok 21: "Thereafter Rama will be enervated by the abduction of his wife, and then surely and
conveniently I wish to retaliate him if he is going to come up against me, for my inner-soul will
be firstly gratified with its volition, namely possessing Seetha." Thus Ravana requested Maareecha.
[3-36-21]

[Commentary] Maheshvara Tiirtha expresses this in terms of Ravana's devotion to Rama. raame bhaaryaa haraNa 
karSite: raama ibha 'Rama, the elephant...' aaryaa 'a venerable one, Seetha...' 
haraNa karSite 'by abduction, harmed by...' adhyadhaara: mat shariiram elliptical: 'my 
body...' tataH 'thereby, by virtue of my act of abducting...' kR^ita arthena 
antaraatmanaa upalakshitaH san 'on my soul-cherished desire becoming fulfilled to get 
salvation...' paschaat 'thereafter...' visrabdham 'impeccably...' sukham 
= moksha, salvation, highest bliss...' prahariSyaami: prakarSeNa hariSyaami 'evidently I 
snatch off that bliss...'

[Commentary] "When I abduct that venerable Seetha, the wife of Elephant like Rama, my body gets harmed like an 
eclipsed moon, but my soul gets fulfilled as I desire eternal salvation, and I can get it evidently 
and impeccably at the hand of Rama, owing to the ill-virtue of my abduction of Seetha.

[Commentary] The eclipsing planet Rahu may hide moon temporarily by which the world looses moonshine for a while. 
If Ravana temporarily hides Seetha, as Rahu hides the moon, Rama, who metaphors with the three 
worlds, may be in gloom temporarily. But neither Rahu nor Ravana are illuminated or enlightened with 
the presence of the moonbeams of Seetha, alias Goddess Lakshmi, for they tried to seize that 
all-illuminating Moon/Seetha by force.

Shlok 22: On listening the very word of Rama that honest-souled Maareecha's mouth is
completely dried up, and he is fully frightened. [3-36-22]

Shlok 23: Wetting dried up lips with his tongue he has become goggle-eyed almost like an
about-to-die animal, and he agonisingly looked up at Ravana with winkless eyes. [3-36-23]

[Commentary] At the very word 'Rama' Maareecha is shuddered.
dashaanana samudiirita vacanam aakarNya raama shabda shravaNa maatreNa sa.mtrasta hR^idayo maariicaH kR^itaanjaliH evam uvaaca - dk From the time when he was firstly struck by Rama's arrow he retired to hermitage 
and no demonic activity is undertaken by Maareecha. But now Ravana is instigating, which leads 
Maareecha to his own end, of which he is perfectly aware.

Shlok 24: Maareecha's heart sank with scare as he is aware of Rama's valour when he was in the
great forest of Tataka, thus suppliantly making palm-fold he started telling about factuality of
Rama to Ravana, which is beneficial both to Ravana and to himself, as well, if only Ravana is
heedful of it. [3-36-24]



SARGA 37
------------------------------

[Text] Maareecha advises Ravana to stay away from Rama with his own unpleasant experience
with Rama's arrow when he was in Tataka forest, and portrays a gruesome picture of Rama to Ravana,
asking him to not to meddle with Rama's affairs.

Shlok 1: On hearing that idea of the chief of demons Ravana in abducting Seetha, Maareecha, a
well-informed one and an articulator spoke to the lord of demons in reply. [3-37-1]

Shlok 2: "It will always be easy to get people who talk pleasantly, oh, king, but it is
impossible to get them who talk judgementally and give suggestions that may be apparently insipid,
but that are recuperative, more so, it is impossible to get listeners of such advises. [3-37-2]

[Commentary] There are many who render advises without weighing pros and cons, but just to
get along and please their master. There will be none to suggest expeditiously, though that
suggestion presently will be unpleasant and unsavoury like a recuperative insipid diet, but in
reality, it is result-oriented. Even if such an advisor suggests in earnest, he will have no
listener who listens earnestly and effectuates it. So, listen to my words that may now be
unsavoury, but will prove beneficial to you in long run, if you can foresee your future properly.
Dharmaakuutam says: anena sva prayojana virodha sankayaa raaja buddhi anusaareNa vaktaaro 
mantriNaH sulabhaaH - kintu anartha paryavasaayino raajabuddhim tiraskritya shubhodarka vaktaaro 
mantriNo durlabhaa iti suucitam - then the commentator goes on to quote vidura niiti from Maha Bharata, wherein it
is said: yo hi dharma samaashritya hatvaa bhatruH priyaarthe | apriyaaNi aaha pathyaani tena 
raajaa sahaayavaan || sulabhaaH puruSaa raajan satatam priya vaadinaH | apriyasya ca pathyasya 
vaktaa shrotaa ca durlabhaH ||  The last two foots may be observed because they are similar to the above
verse of Ramayana, by such similarities some hold the opinion that Maha Bharata is an explanation
to Ramayana.

Shlok 3: "Definitely you do not apperceive Rama who is decidedly dynamic and exaltedly adept,
for you are impetuous and desultory in dealing with your spies, but that Rama is identical to the
thunderous Mahendra and tempestuous Varuna, the Rain-god. [3-37-3]

Shlok 4: "Oh, boy, will there be safety to all demons on earth? Or, that highly enraged Rama
will render this world de-demonised! [3-37-4]

[Commentary] '...but for you...' 'Will you let the demons on earth live, or, would like to
eradicate them through Rama, through your obsessions.' The second thought has come true when Rama
eliminated all demons.

Shlok 5: "Has this Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, taken birth to end your life, or what! And
because of this Seetha will there be a great disaster, so to speak! [3-37-5]

Shlok 6: "Egocentric and rampant, such as you are, on acquiring you as her lord, will the
City of Lanka be doomed along with her demons, and you put together, or what! [3-37-6]

Shlok 7: "Any king of your like who is with a self-will, ill-will, ensorcelled by evil, and
malicious in intent, that king alone ruins his own city-state, his own people, even himself, as a
matter of actual fact. [3-37-7]

[Commentary] For this the commentator says: anena dur mantritaH kaamavritto naya dveSii 
raajaa sakala mantri vargeNa aishvaryenA saha nashyati iti uktam - tathaa ca kaamandake - anaatmavaan naya 
dveSii vardhaya ari sampadaH | praapyaa api mahad aishvaryam saha tena vinashyati ||  Dharmaakuutam being an encyclopedic commentary on
Ramayana quotes Kamandaka etc., in such matters of dharma. The availability of the books quoted by
the commentator of Dharmaakuutam in reprint is doubtful, where Dharmaakuutam itself is unavailable
in full, in these days.

Shlok 8: "Rama the enhancer of his mother Kausalya's happiness is completely forsaken by his
father - no, he is not; there is unseemliness in him - no, not in the least; he is out of character
- no; he is selfish - no; he is an ignoble Kshatriya - no, not at all; and he is neither a debased
one insofar as the merits of righteousness are concerned, nor he is atrocious towards living
beings, for he takes delight in the welfare of all beings. [3-37-8, 9]

Shlok 10: "On seeing his father who is a proponent of truth, and whom Kaikeyi has outwitted,
that virtue-souled Rama neatly decamped from Ayodhya saying that 'I will prove my father to be a
real proponent of truth.' [3-37-10]

Shlok 11: "Discarding the kingdom and even royal-comforts Rama entered Dandaka forest only to
fulfil the cherish of Kaikeyi, viz., kingdom for her son Bharata, and even that of Dasharatha,
viz., to remain loyal to his promise to Kaikeyi. [3-37-11]

Shlok 12: "Rama is ruthless - no; an unscholarly one - no; unconquered are his senses - no;
and oh, boy, it is unapt of you to speak of impalpable and unheard-of topics in this way.
[3-37-12]

Shlok 13: "Rama is the embodiment of righteousness, he is an equable person with truthfulness
as his valour, and as with Indra to all gods he is the king of entire world. [3-37-13]

[Commentary] Rama's principles alone make him victorious, as he does not deviate from the
path of righteousness. And by not deviating from the path of righteousness, he is truly valorous
and the question of his defeat does not arise, because he will abide by his conscience.

Shlok 14: "Rama's proper resplendence is protecting Vaidehi. How then you really wish to
forcibly rob her off from Rama, as though wishing to rob the Sun of his resplendence. [3-37-14]

[Commentary] Incidentally, Prabha is the name of sun's brilliance and she is the wife of Sun,
and if she is to be separated from sun, only an eternal gloom overcasts the world. Ravana has no
doubt controlled natural forces like sun, moon, rivers etc., but not altogether eradicated or
upturned their functions. Then, is it possible to Ravana and hosts of his demonic-adherents to
thrive in an unnatural gloom? This is the doubt of Maareecha.

Shlok 15: "Arrows as it jets of fire, bow and sword as it firewood that fire called Rama will
be blazing in war, and it will be inapt of you to enter into such an uninfringeable fire,
recklessly. [3-37-15]

Shlok 16: "With the bow stretched to his ear becoming a gaping mouth spouting flames, arrows
becoming tongues of fire spewed forth from that flaming mouth, he that Rama the reified Terminator
will become fierce and insufferable when he wields bow and arrows, and oh, dear boy Ravana, it will
be inapt of you to at once draw pretty nigh of such an annihilator of the armies of enemies, on
discarding your kingdom, comforts and even the dear life of yours. [3-37-16, 17]

Shlok 18: "Which Rama's wife is Janaka's daughter that Rama is indeed with an inestimable
resplendence, and it will be incapable of you to steal Seetha while such a Rama's bow safeguards
her in the forest, besides the firewall called his resplendence. [3-37-18]

[Commentary] This can be said 'Rama's resplendence is inestimable and Seetha is his wife.' But 
keeping the import of Seetha's words as at 3-9-15 'if fuel is available in adjacency of burning 
fire, the luminosity of the fire also enhances immensely,' and when the factor of resplendence is 
taken, it is not Rama's resplendence alone that is described, but Seetha's also. Again, it is not 
that some part of Rama's resplendence is taken out and put in Seetha. It is an indivisible radiance 
of that couple like that of Sun and his wife Prabha, as said earlier by Maareecha. Seetha is not 
directly said by her name but her father Janaka's name is brought in, because Janaka is both a 
raajarSi and brahmarSi Kingly-saint and Brahman-sage, as well. And Janaka is capable 
of saying idam brahmam idam kshaatram shaapat api sharaat api 'here is Brahma-hood and here 
is Kshatriya-hood, either by malediction or by arrow, whichever meetly of you, you can confront me.' 
This apart, it is said that 'a pertinent devotion to a god makes the devotee like that god alone.'
shraddhayaa devo devatvam ashnute and Seetha is the devotee of Rama and she became one with 
Rama. Thereby, there is twofold resplendence, namely, that of Rama and that of Seetha, so it is 
inapt of you to make any useless effort when everything is firewalled.

Shlok 19: "That lady Seetha is his wife, dearest than the lives of that lion-chested lion-man
Rama, and in truth, she is avowed to follow him alone, in perpetuity. [3-37-19]

Shlok 20: "As the spire of blazing ritual fire cannot be abused, so also, she that curvaceous
Maithili, the cherished wife of that dynamic Rama, is an impossibility for any abuse. [3-37-20]

Shlok 21: "Oh, king of demons, What is the result in making such a futile effort? If that Rama
glances at you in a given war that alone ends your life. [3-37-21]

[Commentary] The very start for any negative activity itself is self-ruinous to the starter.
anena sarva anarthaka kaaraNa bhuuto balavat virodho na kaarya iti suucitam - tathaa ca 
praaciinaaH - - anucita karma aarambhaH sva jana virodho baliiyasaa spardhaa | pramadaa jane 
vishvaaso mrityu dvaaraaNi catvaari || dk  'undesirable activity, starting that
activity, too much of enmity with one's own people, too much belief in one's own womenfolk... are
the four doors to death...' Hence, Maareecha is advising Ravana not to embark on a wrong foot, and
even if Seetha is forcibly abducted, she cannot be possessed because she surrounded by a firewall,
namely the resplendence of that couple.

Shlok 22: "If you cherish to take pleasure for a long time in your life, in your comforts and
also thus in your kingdom, which kingdom is highly impossible to achieve, do not do anything
unpleasant to Rama. [3-37-22]

Shlok 23: "Such as you are, you should firstly deliberate with all of your ministers that have
a righteous bearing, duly keeping your brother Vibheeshana at the helm of affairs, and then you
take a decision on your own considering rights and wrongs of the case, and bearing in mind about
your own strengths and weakness, and even on making sure of Raghava's capability in its reality,
and then it will be apt of you to take up befitting action that will be conducive to your
interests. [3-37-24,25]

Shlok 25: "Oh, king of nightwalkers Ravana, I for myself deem that your confrontation with
Rama, the prince of Kosala, in a war is improper, and a better, befitting, and a reasonable one is
this advise of mine, to which you may listen further. [3-37-25]



SARGA 38
------------------------------

[Text] Maareecha continues his good word to Ravana and he dissuades him from abducting
Seetha. His advice is that the dalliance with other's wives is the greatest sin, more so, with
Rama's wife as Rama's valour is irrefutable. Maareecha narrates how Rama hurt him while
safeguarding Vishwamitra's Vedic-ritual, when Rama was still a young boy.

Shlok 1: "At one time even I was on the rove around this earth, taking pride in my valour,
bearing the strength of a thousand elephants, mountainous in my size and black-cloudlike in my
sheen, wearing ear-knobs and a crown made out of refined gold, with a bludgeon as my weapon, and
such as I was, I rambled Dandaka forest causing terror to the world, and eating the fleshes of
sages." Thus Maareecha started to narrate his experience with Rama. [3-38-1, 2]

Shlok 3b- 4a: "The virtue-souled great-saint Vishvamitra who was highly scared of me, then on
going to Dasharatha in person that great-saint spoke this to that lord of people. [3-38-3b, 4a]

Shlok 4b- 5a: " 'An awesome dismay has befallen owing to this Maareecha, oh, lord of people
Dasharatha, let Rama safeguard me becoming alert at the opportune time of the Vedic-ritual.
[3-38-4b 5a]

Shlok 5b- 6a: "When he is spoken in that way, then that virtue-souled king Dasharatha replied that
great-fortunate and great-saint Vishvamitra in this way. [3-38-5b, 6a]

Shlok 6b- 7a: " 'This boy Rama is less than twelve years in his age, unproficient in the use of
weapons, and if need be, whatever army of mine is there it will march on along with me instead of
Rama. [3-38-6b, 7a]

[Commentary] In Bala Kanda the age of Rama as said by Dasharatha to Vishvamitra is uuna
SoDasa varSaH 'less than sixteen years.' Here Maareecha is saying that Rama is less than twelve.
Maheshvara Tiirtha says that Maareecha lessened the age of Rama only to intimidate Ravana.

Shlok 7b- 8a: " 'And having come in person with fourfold forces, oh eminent sage, I myself will
eradicate that nightwalker whomever you indicate as an enemy of yours." So said Dasharatga to
Vishvamitra. [3-38-7b, 8a]

[Commentary] In the fourfold army the four categories of army units are chariots, elephants,
cavalry, and foot-soldiers.

Shlok 8b- 9a: "When the sage Vishvamitra is spoken thus, then he said to the king, 'No other force
in the world than Rama can counterbalance that demon. [3-38-8b, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: " 'No doubt, you are a defender of gods in wars, and oh, king, the exploits you have
undertaken on behalf of gods are well-known in the triad of worlds. [3-38-9b, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11: " 'Maybe your army is a remarkable one, oh, enemy-inflamer, let it sit tight here
alone, and even if this great resplendent one is still a boy he alone is competent to forestall
that Maareecha, hence oh, enemy-subjugator, let good betide you, I wish to take him alone along
with me.' [3-38-10b, 11]

Shlok 12: "Thus that way on saying he that sage Vishvamitra returned to his own hermitage
highly gladdening to take the prince Rama along with him. [3-38-12]

Shlok 13: "Then in Dandaka forest Rama twingeing his amazing bow stayed nearby the sage
Vishvamitra who entered the vow of Vedic-ritual. [3-38-13]

[Commentary] There is a difference in mentioning the forest as Dandaka. Bala Kanda says that
Vishvamitra performed ritual in north and Maareecha is now saying that as Dandaka forest.

Shlok 14: "At that time, yet unborn are the identities of adulthood like moustache on his
face, and that providential one was magnificent in looks with a peacock-blue complexion, wearing a
single cloth, locks of hair, and golden locket, and wielding a bow, and he was irradiating the
Dandaka forest with a radiating radiance of his own, and then he appeared like the just risen
baby-moon. [3-38-14, 15]

[Commentary] The identities of adulthood are the discardable things like moustaches, beard,
etc. These are natural to humans or to birthed beings. But the mythological entities do not have
them. As a young scholar, the boys are supposed to wear simply, hence 'one-piece-clothing' is said
to be the dress of Rama. This suggests that he is not wearing any shield or armour to keep him
safe. In Bala Kanda, at the outset of the journey of Rama and Lakshmana with Vishvamitra, it is
said that they are wearing finger-covers made of certain lizard skin, which means to say that their
fingers are very tender in using arrows. His mothers delicately arranged the locks of hair, because
he is still 'boyish' to her. More so, he is with a 'boyish' ornament, say a single pendant, not
verily embellished with princely jewellery. He appeared like some providential 'boy' hitherto
unseen, with the height of a peacock, with the complexion of peacock-neck-blue, and moving about
like a noble peacock. This boyish-Rama peacock is not screaming, yet his bow is twanging; leave
alone the screeching and screaming.

[Commentary] The 'new-moon' metaphor to Rama suggests that he has only waxing and no waning
in him, uttarottara abhivR^iddhi and also that he is by birth an antagonist of tamas 'the
darkness,' or darkish activities, like the moon whose activity is only to illumine the night.
Further, he has a likeable persona to any, even to the present demon Maareecha, and even to Ravana.
When Ravana sees Rama for the first time in war, Ravana praisefully acknowledges Rama's
personality. Besides, Rama's gleam is like that of a baby-moon, against the backdrop of a thickish,
darkish, blackish sky, called the forest.

Shlok 16: "And I who was like a massive black-cloud, wearing golden ear-knobs, already a
forceful one further reinforced with the boon of Brahma, I pridefully entered into the interior of
Vishwamitra's hermitage. [3-38-16]

[Commentary] The golden ear-knobs on the lobes of ears are either indicative of the knowledge
one possess or the wealth factor. Maareecha refers to these ear ornaments more than once suggesting
that 'wealth or wisdom is nothing to Rama, but righteousness alone will work out.' Because Ravana
did not give an ear for the suggestions of Maareecha, his Lanka, built with refined gold, will be
burnt to ashes in Sundara Kanda.

Shlok 17: "Rama quickly noticed me on my very entry with an uplifted weapon, and on seeing me
he unexcitedly strung bowstring to his bow. [3-38-17]

Shlok 18: "Unmindfully trivialising him as, 'this Raghava is just a boy,' I made haste and ran
towards that Fire-altar of Vishvamitra. [3-38-18]

Shlok 19: "He then released an acute arrow that eliminates the enemy, and hit by it I am
plunged into the ocean which was a hundred yojana-s off. [3-38-19]

Shlok 20: "That Rama did not wish to kill me then, and I am thus saved by that valiant one,
oh, dear boy Ravana, but the thrust of Rama's arrow bewildered my animation and I was on my last
legs. [3-38-20]

Shlok 21: "That way I who had been flung into the abyssal water of the ocean by him gained
consciousness after a long time and proceeded towards the city of Lanka. [3-38-21]

Shlok 22: "At that time, that one with elementary knowledge in the use of weaponry, but who
can undertake deeds in an effortless manner, such a boy, such a Rama spared me, albeit killing them
that were my helpmates in that escapade. [3-38-22]

Shlok 23: "Thereby, if you wish to make for any confrontation with Rama, despite of my
proscribing you, you will ruin yourself on getting a disastrous calamity. [3-38-23]

Shlok 24: "The demons are methodical in sporting and flirting, thus by their own conduct they
are also socialising and frolicking, and to them you derive distress and disaster. [3-38-24]

Shlok 25: "Dense with skyscrapers and palaces, and decorated with many a gemstone is that city
Lanka, but you will see it completely shattered down, for the sake of that Maithili. [3-38-25]

Shlok 26: "Even if with uncommitted sins, the sinless will get ruined owing to their
interdependence with other sinners, like the fish in a lake with snakes. [3-38-26]

Shlok 27: "Bedaubed with divine sandal-paste, beautified with divine ornaments are the limbs
of the demons now, perchance you will be seeing them trampled out on ground for the blunder of
yours. [3-38-27]

Shlok 28: "Maybe, you will have to see the fleeing of the nightwalkers surviving after the
carnage in all ten directions, some abandoning their wives and some along with their wives, only
for lack of a protector. [3-38-28]

Shlok 29: "Without a doubt you will be seeing Lanka encircled with an enmesh of arrows,
enfolded in the tongues of torches, while her buildings are utterly gutting down. [3-38-29]

Shlok 30: "Oh, king, there is no other sin that is outrageous and gravest than the dalliance
with another's wife and, besides, you already have a thousand wives, isn't so! [3-38-30]

Shlok 31: "Abide by your own wife and be delighted with her, oh, demon, safeguard your own
ethnos, thus safeguard dignity, affluence, and kingdom of demons, thereby safeguard even your own
dear life. [3-38-31]

Shlok 32: "If you desire to take pleasure with your beautiful wives and with your friend's
circles for a long time, do not do anything undesirable to Rama. [3-38-32]

Shlok 33: "If you wish to intimidate Seetha aggressively despite of my considerable preventing
in all my good-heartedness towards you, then your army will fade away, and you with your kinsfolk
will emigrate to the world of Yama, the Terminator, for your life will be taken away by the arrow
of Rama." Thus, Maareecha spoke to Ravana. [3-38-33]



SARGA 39
------------------------------

[Text] Maareecha further advises Ravana to avoid confrontation with Rama for it would be
ruinous to the entire demonic race. He narrates another episode of his misadventure with Rama and
how he escaped from the all-pursuant arrow of Rama.

Shlok 1: "Thus I was somehow released by him in a confrontation then in his teens. Now you
may also listen to what has happened later in his adulthood." Thus Maareecha continued his advise
to Ravana. [4-39-1]

Shlok 2: "Though Rama hit me previously in such a way, I unabashedly entered Dandaka forest
together with two more demons who were in the guise of animals. [4-39-2]

Shlok 3: "On becoming a gigantic carnivorous animal with a torching tongue, incisive teeth
and excruciating horns, and with an extraordinary energy, I was on the rove in Dandaka forest while
getting at Rama. [4-39-3]

Shlok 4: "I moved about Dandaka forest, oh, Ravana, in an extremely horrible aspect of
animal, utterly brutalising the sages at ritual-altars, holy bathing places and under the trees of
religious sanctuaries while reaching Rama. [4-39-4]

Shlok 5: "I have proceeded to Rama killing saints in Dandaka forest who are the treaders in
saintliness, and drinking off their blood and feasting on their flesh. [4-39-5]

Shlok 6: "On becoming such a brutal animal I have been eating the flesh of sages, frightening
the forest dwellers, and in that way I rambled in Dandaka forest besotted with blood-drinking while
reaching Rama. [4-39-6]

Shlok 7- 8a: "While I was wandering in Dandaka forest as an abuser of virtue, then I reached Rama
who by then has assumed the rectitude befitting to a saint, and I even reached the great-fortunate
Vaidehi and top-speeded-chariot-rider Lakshmana. [4-39-7, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9- 10: "I was in the shape of an animal with incisive horns. Such as I was I recollected my
earlier grudge against that great mighty Rama who takes delight in the welfare of all being, who by
then was santlike on a regulated diet and abiding in the forest, whereby I presumed him to be mere
hermit. In that way, I was very extremely infuriated to recollect his earlier assault on me, and I
indiscriminately dashed towards him, only to kill him, completely disregarding his other faculties.
[4-39-8b, 9, 10]

Shlok 11: "Stringing out his highly magnificent bow Rama then released three excruciating and
enemy eliminating arrows which in their egress match the Air-god and the Divine-Eagle Garuda.
[4-39-11]

Shlok 12: "All those three thunderbolt like arrows that have only blood for their board,
acutely bent at barbs, and that are highly horrendous have come at us in a coordinated manner.
[4-39-12]

Shlok 13: "As I have earlier seen the fear caused by his arrow I am in the know of Rama's
valour, hence I retreated from there trickily and gingerly, but the other two demons were killed.
[4-39-13]

[Commentary] Here the action of Rama's arrow is indicated. Rama's arrow will not shoot at the
back of the opponent or it backstabs either. Even when killing Vali, though Rama is not affronting
Vali, Rama's arrow pierced Vali's chest. Here because Maareecha is retreating, that third arrow of
Rama did not kill Maareecha but followed him in a chasing manner. But the other two demons
unknowing about Rama's arrow, they confronted him and the other two arrows eliminated them. There
is discussion on the word shaThaH 'one capable to trick' used in the verse as some mms employ the
word sharaH, 'an arrow.' In this section vividly explainable verses are there in some ancient
versions of mms. This particular verse reads like this in them: paraakramaj~no raamasya tathaa dR^iSTa bhayaH puraa | aapatantam sharam 

dR^iSTvaa megha ga.mbhiira nissvanam || tato aham vegavaan tatra vaata.mhaa 

nimeshataH | apa kraanta param paaram nivR^ittaH saagaraat sharaH ||  'I am in the know of Rama's valour, and I am also in the know of what fear
he caused in an earlier instance, and on seeing the arrows coming upon like thunderous clouds, in a
wink I escaped to the other side of ocean, and Rama's arrow having come chasing me up to
ocean-shore returned.' In here, the efficacy of Rama's arrow is clearly narrated and it is not
clear why pundits did not consider these verses of ancient mms instead of the above verse.

Shlok 14: "When I was somehow exempted by the arrow of Rama I regained lifespan, and when that
arrow made me to renounce everything like a monk and fled me to this place, the other side of ocean
to where you came by your aircraft, here I am living here in a yogic way, self-collectedly like an
ascetic. [4-39-14]

Shlok 15: "From then on wards, I am indeed descrying Rama at this tree and at that tree,
dressed in jute-cloths and black deerskin, and handling his bow like the Terminator handling a
tether. [4-39-15]

Shlok 16: "Given to fright I even visualise thousands Rama-s, and whole this forest is
reflecting to me as one entity of Rama. [4-39-16]

Shlok 17: "Even at a place void of people I am envisaging Rama alone, and oh, king of demons,
even if he enters my dream, in fact, I am jolting up and swooning. [4-39-17]

Shlok 18: "Oh, Ravana, appalled of Rama the names starting with the syllable 'ra' like
ratna-s, ratha-s, viz., gemstones, chariots are appalling to me, including your name, that starts
with a 'ra....' [4-39-18]

[Commentary] 'If I hear the first letter 'ra' of any given name, I am scared at the ensuing
second syllable presuming it to be 'ma' and if that second syllable of that word I am going to hear
happens to be other than 'ma' then my fear ceases.'

Shlok 19: "I am well-acquainted with his efficacy, and a war with him will be an unfair thing
for you, for that Raghu's descendant can in fact kill either Emperor Bali or Namuchi, the demon.
[4-39-19]

[Commentary] Emperor Bali is more powerful and mighty than Ravana. aananda raamaayana says in
a chapter on the 'defeats of Ravana' raavaNa paraajaya, that Ravana once entered netherworld to
conquer it, where Bali is held captive by Trivikrama, i.e., Vishnu. At that time Bali and his queen
are playing dice game. When Ravana entered, the dice in the hand of Bali has slipped to the floor,
and Bali asks Ravana to pick and give it before conquering netherworld. Ravana who lifted Mt.
Kailash could not lift that two-inch dice, which is so far handled playfully by Bali. Such is the
might of Emperor Bali

Shlok 20: "You may either wage a war with Rama if you wish to avenge the killings of Khara and
others, or forgive and forget that Rama agreeing to my suggestions, but do not broach the topic of
Rama with me if you wish to see me alive. [4-39-20]

Shlok 21: "In the world many of the sagacious and reasonable people that are the practisers of
righteousness are utterly ruined along with their kith and kin, just by the misdeeds of others.
[4-39-21]

Shlok 22: "Such a saintly one as I am, I am bound to ruin by other's misdeeds, hence you do
whatever that is fair to you, but I am not the one to simply take after you. [4-39-22]

Shlok 23: "Definitely Rama is the one with exceptional resplendence, exemplary courage and
extraordinary power, and for sure, he becomes an eradicator of the world of demons. [4-39-23]

Shlok 24: "If Khara positioned in Janasthaana has firstly overstepped his bounds and attacked
Rama, that too owing to Shuurpanakha, and if Rama of uncomplicated actions has eliminated Khara in
self-defence, what really is the transgression of Rama in that matter, you tell of that in the
final analysis. [4-39-24]

Shlok 25: "I am saying this word of advise as I am ambitious of the wellbeing of my kinsmen
through you, and if this is disagreeable to you, you will have to deliver up your life in a
confrontation with Rama along with the lives of your kinsmen, perishing at the linearly
accelerating arrows of Rama. [4-39-25]



SARGA 40
------------------------------

[Text] Ravana rebuts Maareecha for giving an unasked advice and details his plan to abduct
Seetha. Ravana intimidates Maareecha that he himself will kill Maareecha immediately if his orders
are disobeyed, and Maareecha may perhaps have no opportunity to die at the hands of Rama.

Shlok 1: When Maareecha spoke those acceptable and equitable words, Ravana rejected them like
a person with a death wish rejects medicament. [3-40-1]

Shlok 2: Ushered by the Terminator the king of demons Ravana, uncouthly spoke these
unbefitting words to Maareecha who had been speaking conducive and beneficial words of advise.
[3-40-2]

Shlok 3: "All these meaningless words that are being said to me are decidedly worthless, in
effect, like the seeds seeded in wastelands. [3-40-3]

Shlok 4: "But it is impossible to scare me away from a war with that iniquitous and imprudent
Rama, that too, from a human being, with these words of yours. [3-40-4]

[Commentary] There is a grammarian's irk in bhettum ' to cut off, to destroy' 
bhetum 'to scare me' and if bhettum is taken, then 'it is impossible for that human to 
destroy me in war' will be the meaning, as per Eastern recension.

Shlok 5: "He who bolted off to forest in a single-foot on hearing the artless words of a
woman, forfeiting his kingdom, friends and relatives, and even his mother, likewise his father too,
you cannot scare me away from such a Rama. [3-40-5]

Shlok 6: "But his wife Seetha who is dearer to him more than his lives is certainly seizable
by me in association with you, as that Rama had purposelessly killed Khara in a war. [3-40-6]

Shlok 7: "In this way my thinking is decided and it is lingering on in my heart, and it is
impossible to roll back my mind or heart even for Indra coming along with gods and demons.
[3-40-7]

Shlok 8: "If you are asked about the credits or discredits, or either of the danger or
ideation of the deed for determining its modus operandi, it will be apt of you to talk like this,
but I did not seek any viewpoints of yours. [3-40-8]

Shlok 9: "Even if someone is asked, and if he desires his own welfare, then he has to submit
his opinion to the king suppliantly upraising his palm-fold, may he be an intellectual, or an
astute adviser. [3-40-9]

[Commentary] A king cannot be addressed unless he asks. Then Maareecha, who is fully aware of
monarchical protocol, how he informed his analysis of Rama to Ravana, will be the question. Even if
a king is resolute in undertaking a mad act, he is to be cautioned. In some cases, a king is to be
held by hair and taught, as a teacher holds the taught by his tuft of hair to earbash. Likewise an
upright minister shall counsel the king properly, as Krishna advises Vidura in Maha Bharata at
Udyoga Parva 93:

[Commentary] nanu evam sati
niitij~no maariico raavaNena apR^iShTaH katham uktavaan it cet - tanna - unmatto raaj~naa prashna
akareNa api kaaryaatyaprasaktau nigR^ihya api vaktavyatvaat - tathaa ca pR^iShTen naiva vaktavyam
iti katham vaktum shakyata iti cenna - pR^iShTenaiva vaktavyam iti etasya svastha avastha raaja
viShayatvaat - aapadi uttham pratipanne c raajani kesha grahaNa puurvakam pR^iShTe naa api
vaktavyam eva - dk .

Shlok 10: "The king being lord of the land is to be addressed preceded with gentility, with
auspicious and beneficial words that do not contradict the interests of that lord, more so, they
shall be inclusive of etiquette. [3-40-10]

[Commentary] The imperial protocol is an exaggerated affair, as known to everybody. Here
Ravana is demanding one more aspect in demanding, 'the words that do not go against the whims and
fancies of the king.' And this is more than an autocrat's mentality. Dharmaakuutam says referring
to Kaamandaka, a scripture on political science: 'even if a king asks, one shall not 'readily'
reply though every aspect of that question is known to the replier, and the subject speaking in the
audience of a king shall forget his own know-all-ness or his own entity in the knowledge of the
subject at issue. vijaanan na api
bruuyaat bhartruH kShiptaH uttaram vacaH | praviiNo api hi medhaavii varjayet abhimaanitaam
||.

Shlok 11: "Or else, oh, Maareecha, even if a beneficial word is said, but if it is said with
reprehension it will not gladden that king who insists upon honour, for that said word is
dishonourable, let alone reprehension. [3-40-11]

Shlok 12: "The kings with infinite vigour embody five constituents forces of Fire, Moon, Rain,
Terminator, and that of Indra, the Administrator of Natural Forces. [3-40-12]

Shlok 13- 14a: "Oh, nightwalker, thus the kings being great-souls personify the sultriness of Fire,
sternness of Indra, softness of Moon, suppleness of Rain, and harshness of Terminator, and
therefore in all situations they are respectable and reverential. [3-40-13, 14a]

[Commentary] Ravana has already conquered Indra and the said gods are responsible for the
routine administration of universe. Hence, he is informing Maareecha about ordinary kings,
presuming that Maareecha does not recognize the rectitude in dealing with ordinary kings, more so,
with the king of kings, namely Ravana himself, which he says in next verse. A king acquires these
traits of the presiding deities of the compass, by virtue of his kingship, and the sages said the
very same to Rama when he entered Dandaka forest. anena agni aadi dik
paalaka ruupatvaat raajaa puujyo maanyaH ca iti suucitam - dk .

Shlok 14b- 15a: "But you are ill-advisedly babbling with me in this way, incognizant of rectitude
and holding on to your obsession, and wishing ill of me, as I am on your doorstep. [3-40-14b,
15a]

Shlok 15: "Oh, demon, I did not ask the rights and wrongs concerning me, nor that which is
expedient for me, but oh, demon of untold bravery, I have said this much to you. [3-40-15]

Shlok 16: " 'It will be apt of you to proffer a helping hand in this deed.' This much I said
to you. And such as you are you may now listen to that task which you have to undertake during the
course of your assistance as I detail it to you. [3-40-16]

Shlok 17: "On becoming an amazing silver-potted golden deer you move in front of Seetha in the
hermitage of Rama, and on verily alluring Vaidehi you can go away as you like. [3-40-17, 18 ]

Shlok 19: "On seeing you as a wholly illusory golden deer curiosity arises in Vaidehi, and
indeed she tells Rama, 'bring that one quickly.' [3-40-19]

Shlok 20: "Further, on Rama's coming out of his hermitage you go distantly and blurt out in
this way, 'ha Seetha' and even as, 'ha, Lakshmana,' mimicking Rama's voice. [3-40-20]

Shlok 21: "On hearing that, and further hastened by Seetha, even Soumitri apprehensively
follows the path of Rama in all his fondness for Rama. [3-40-21]

Shlok 22: "When Rama is diverted from hermitage, Lakshmana as well, I will carry off Vaidehi
effortlessly like the Thousand-eyed Indra who once carried off Sachi Devi. [3-40-22]

Shlok 23: "Oh, demon, on carrying out this stint in this manner you may go as you like, and to
you oh, Maareecha with solemn vows, I will grant half of my kingdom. [3-40-23]

Shlok 24: "Hence, oh, gentle one, get going on a trouble-free path for the easy achievement of
the task, and I for myself will follow you to Dandaka forest along with the chariot. [3-40-24]

Shlok 25: "My goal will be achieved just by misleading Raghava, and by gaining Seetha without
a conflict, then I will proceed to Lanka along with you. [3-40-25]

Shlok 26: "If you are not going to do so, oh, Maareecha, for sure I will kill you now itself.
I will get my work done through you even under duress, and indeed, any subject setting against his
king will never succeed safely. [3-40-26]

Shlok 27: "Your life may be indefinite on reaching Rama, but your death is surely definite now
as you are conflicting with me. Hence, keeping all this in view you come to a conclusion that would
be conducive to your interests, and whatever desirable to you let it be done in that way. " Thus
Ravana spoke to Maareecha. [3-40-27]



SARGA 41
------------------------------

[Text] Maareecha dissuades Ravana again and warns him of the fatal consequences if Rama is
irked by the wrongdoings of Ravana. In every utterance, Maareecha repeats that not only Ravana but
the entire demonic race is also going to ruin due to Ravana's impertinence. Finally when Ravana is
heedless of these advises, Maareecha prepares himself to die by the arrow of an enemy, namely Rama,
rather than by his own clansman, Ravana.

Shlok 1: When Ravana perversely ordered that way in all his kingliness, Maareecha spoke these
words caustically and frankly to that king of demons. [3-41-1]

Shlok 2: "Oh, night-walker, by which evildoer this thought, which is self-ruinous to you,
along with your progeny, kingdom and ministers put together, is taught to you? [3-41-2]

Shlok 3: "Who is that reprobate unhappy with such a happy one like you, and oh, king, by whom
this door of demise is ingeniously shown to you? [3-41-3]

Shlok 4: "It is very clear, oh, night-walker, that your rivals with skimpy might are aspiring
that you should be completely ruined coming into conflict with more mighty Rama. [3-41-4]

Shlok 5: "He who wishes you to get ruined by your undertaking a self-made destruction is a
scoundrel with a pernicious intent, as such, by whom you are counselled to do this? [3-41-5]

Shlok 6: "Your ministers are not curbing you anywise when you scramble on a high road to
self-ruination, hence they are indeed to be sentenced to death, but they are not being executed for
their dereliction. [3-41-6]

Shlok 7: "Veracious ministers have to restrain a self-willed king when he relies on a
wrong-route, isn't it. But you are unrestrained by your ministers though you are self-willed and
though you are taking a wrong-route. [3-41-7]

Shlok 8: "Oh, best conqueror Ravana, probity, prosperity and pleasures, and even the
popularity of the ministers, oh, night-walker, are achieved at the beneficence of their master.
[3-41-8]

[Commentary] The popularity, fame etc., of someone is said as yashas and there is 
another word taken as a synonym kiirti. For this Rama Tilaka says: yashaH sva desha 
khyaati, kiirti deshaantara khyaati. Thus 'yashas is the fame within one's own country 
and kiirti is cross-country fame. For this, another ancient commentator Kulluka Bhatt says:
jiivataH khyaati ruupam yashaH, mR^itasya khyaati ruupaam kiirtim 'a living person's fame 
is yashaH and a dead person fame is kiirti Because Ravana is alive and Maareecha 
wishes him to be living, he used that chosen word.

Shlok 9: "Contrariwise, oh, Ravana, all that beneficence of the king to ministers becomes
futile when the king behaves perversely, and even the others, namely the subjects of kingdom, will
derive distress by the negative virtue of their master. [3-41-9]

Shlok 10: "The king alone is the root cause for probity and prosperity, isn't it. Therefore,
oh, best prosperous one, in all situations the kings are to be safeguarded from the ill effects of
influences. [3-41-10]

Shlok 11: "It is impossible to govern kingdom, oh, demon, the night-walker, for a king with
acridity, with hostility, or with immorality. [3-41-11]

Shlok 12: "The ministers with drastic notions will indeed fall apart together with their king,
like a chariot that gets ramshackled together with it charioteer on a rough road, though it is
hieing with galloping horses but badly controlled by that slothful charioteer. [3-41-12]

[Commentary] The ministers with drastic notions not only pull down the king and kingdom, they themselves get ruined 
along with the king and kingdom. anena tiikShNa mantribhii raao naasho bhavati iti | ataH samiiciina 
mantrii sampadaniiya iti uktam - dk -

[Commentary] tathaa ca puraaNa saare - panDiteShu guNaaH sarve muurkhe doShaa 
bhavanti hi | tasmaat muurkha sahasreShu praaam ekam niyojayet || thus puraaNa saara, a treatise on 
all mythological scriptures states that: 'In wise men there will be lots of good qualities. and the 
stupid persons too will be with as many qualities, but they are bad in nature. So it is better to nominate 
one wise man than a thousand stupid persons as minister.'

Shlok 13: "In the world many saintly beings that are high-minded and pursuers of ethicality
are completely ruined together with their kinsmen owing to the misdeeds of others. [3-41-13]

Shlok 14: "Oh, Ravana, the subjects do not flourish while a lord with contrariety and
coerciveness safeguards them, just like goats guarded by a fox. [3-41-14]

Shlok 15: "All those demons will definitely ruin, oh, Ravana, to whom you are the acrimonious
and malicious king with unconquered senses, though you have conquered the heaven. [3-41-15]

Shlok 16: "What is the use of laming for myself as I foregathered this ghastly situation as in
crow-palm-tree syndrome, but in this issue you alone are regrettable, for you are gong to
completely ruin along with your military. [3-41-16]

[Commentary] This in Sanskrit is called kAka-tAlIya--nyAyam: 'crow-palm-tree syndrome' is one among the many compiled in that
language. Here, a fox whose leg is broken has come underneath a palm tree to take shelter from the
scorching sun, as there are no other shady trees. At the same time a crow swooped down on to the
tip of the tree, by which a palm fruit, as big and weighty as a small pinball fell on the head of
fox by the swoop of the crow, and then the misery of that fox is unexplainable. The sitting of fox,
swoop of crow, fall of fruit are all at a time and thus none can blame the other. This syndrome is
named for such fortuitous happenings.

Shlok 17: "That Rama will soon kill you after killing me, and I will be dying at the hand of
my enemy rather than at the hand of my own clansman like you, whereby the purpose of my life will
be brought to an end. [3-41-17]

[Commentary] Maareecha decides that it is better to die at the hand of Rama rather than by
Ravana; raamaat api
martavyam - martavyam raavaNaat api | ubhayod api martavye - varam raamat na raavaNaat | nR^isimha 
puraaNa  - but yet he is trying to divert Ravana from self-ruination.

Shlok 18: "Know that I am killed just when Rama notices me, and know that you are also killed
along with your kinsmen just when you steal Seetha. [3-41-18]

Shlok 19: "If you are going to bring Seetha from their hermitage on going there with me, then
you will not be there, I will not be there, Lanka will not be there, the demons will not be there.
[3-41-19]

Shlok 20: "As a desirer of your welfare I am dissuading you, oh, night-walker, but you may
feel that this word of mine is unpleasant to you. People on diminishing lifetime will be similar to
corpses and a corpse cannot take in the expedient spoken by considerate confidants, isn't so.
[3-41-20]



SARGA 42
------------------------------

[Text] On travelling by the aircraft like chariot Ravana and Maareecha enter Dandaka forest
and arrive at the threshold of Rama's hermitage. Then at the insistence of Ravana Maareecha assumes
the form of an amazing golden Deer, and Seetha catches a sight of that deer.

Shlok 1: Maareecha though curtly said in that way, then afraid of the king of night-walkers
he became self-pitying, and said to Ravana, 'let us go.' [3-42-1]

Shlok 2: "If he who wields a bow, arrows and a sword, and who brandishes a weapon to only
kill me happens to see me again, deem my life is verily lost, without his shooting any arrow.
[3-42-2]

Shlok 3: "None can really make so bold at Rama to reappear with life, isn't it. What is
appearing before you is the reflected image of mine, as I am already slain by the wand of Yama, the
Terminator, the moment I conceded to your demand.

Shlok 4: "When you are spiteful, oh, boy, indeed what can I possibly do otherwise, oh,
night-walker, thither I go, may good betide you." So said Maareecha to Ravana. [3-42-4]

Shlok 5: By that word of Maareecha demon Ravana is very much gladdened and he spoke this
sentence tightly hugging him. [3-42-5]

Shlok 6: "This word of yours shows your obduracy for you are abiding under the control of my
dictate, and though you were a different night-walker earlier, henceforth you are really the good
old Maareecha. [3-42-6]

[Commentary] Some mms use the word shauNDiirya for cChauTirya , where 
shauNDiirya is the word for courageousness, shauNDiirya tyaagii viirayoH : nighanTu 
The other way to tell this is: "Though your words show the fear of my dictate, but on listening 
those obdurate words, it appears that you have spoken them for yourself, regaining the grit of your 
demon-hood and estimating Rama as your own enemy," by which Ravana is shirking his responsibility to 
Maareecha himself in the event of the death of Maareecha.

Shlok 7: "Then you promptly emplane this sky-flying chariot which is yoked with ghost-faced
mules and adorned with gems along with me. [3-42-7]

[Commentary] It may be noted that this sort of air-chariots, though richly decorated with
valuable gold and gems, but drawn by asses or mules, that too ghost-faced ones, are a kind of the
then sci-fi version of aircrafts. Ravana's son Indrajit also uses such spaceships in Yuddha Kanda
and his weaponry is altogether different, i.e., somewhat like the present day laser oriented
hardware. These propellers may not be construed as real donkeys or mules but some powered
vehicle-drawing instruments designed to look like ordinary harmless creatures.

Shlok 8: "On deluding Vaidehi it is apt of you to go as you please, and I will bring that
Seetha of Mithila, however defiant it might be." Thus Ravana said to Maareecha. [3-42-8]

[Commentary] Ravana is saying repeatedly that Maareecha can go away after beguiling Seetha
and misleading Rama and Lakshmana away from hermitage. Maareecha knows that there is no place to go
away from Rama's arrow, which once chased him up to seashore. But Ravana presumes that if Maareecha
is capable enough, he will escape Rama, or if this old demon Maareecha is incapable of it, he may
perhaps die by the arrow of Rama, for which Ravana is unconcerned.

Shlok 9- 10a: Tataka's son Maareecha said "All right" to Ravana, and then both Ravana and
Maareecha mounted the chariot as they would emplane an aircraft and swiftly journeyed from the
surroundings of Maareecha's hermitage. [3-42-9, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: While looking at the seaports and forests, also at all the mountains and rivers,
even at the cities and provinces en route they proceeded. [3-42-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 12a: On reaching Dandaka forest along with Maareecha the king of demons Ravana has then
seen the hermitage of Raghava. [3-42-11b, 12a]

[Commentary] Please refer to the endnote for the Ancient Indian way of classification of
villages, towns, and cities as per Indian architecture called vaastu shaastra.

Shlok 12b- 13a: Alighting the chariot that is decorated with golden ornaments Ravana then spoke this
sentence to Maareecha taking his hand into his. [3-42-12b, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: "This one which we are seeing and which is surrounded with banana plants is the
threshold of Rama's hermitage, and -`----oh, friend, the purpose for which we came here let it be
effectuated promptly." Thus Ravana hastened Maareecha. [3-42-13b, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: "And on hearing Ravana's words demon Maareecha then became a deer and indeed ambled
freely in the frontage of Rama's hermitage. [3-42-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: Adopting the form of a gorgeous deer which is superbly amazing just by its
appearance, whose tips of antlers are in the hue of best sapphires, and whose face is whitish at
some places and not so whitish at other in its look, he became a Golden Deer and moved thereabout.
[3-42-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: One of its cheeks in the shade of a reddish-lotus while the other in the hue of a
bluish-lotus, one of its ears is in the hue of bloomed blue-lotus while the other is in the shade
of a sapphire, while the shine of its stomach is like that of a best blue-diamond,
Indra-niila-maNi, and with a little upraised neck that deer has moved about there. [3-42-16b,
17a]

Shlok 17b- 18a: One flank is shining whitish like Madhuka flowers and the other is similar to the
roseate fibrils of lotuses, while its hooves are similar to the gemstone lapis, calves thin, and
thus with very well cohered limbs that deer moved about there. [3-42-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: With an upraised tail that shone forth in a tinge equal to the weapon of Indra,
namely Rainbow, and with a complexion that is lustrous and dappled with many diverse gemlike
dapples, that deer moved thereabout with a heart-stealing aura. [3-42-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: Thus that demon Maareecha emerged like a highly splendorous and fascinating deer in
a wink highly irradiating those woodlands, and the threshold of Rama's hermitage in particular.
[3-42-19b, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21: Adopting such an exquisite and heart-stealing form which is amazingly dappled with
the colours of diverse ores, that demon ambled all over there freely with the bearing of a real
deer in order that Vaidehi might be deluded, and he moved forward onto the pastures. [3-42-2b,
21]

Shlok 22: And with hundreds of silvery stipples of body he became an astonishing deer with
pleasant looks and indeed moved chewing new grass-blades of trees. [3-42-22]

Shlok 23: That Golden Deer has gone into the boscages of banana plants, and moved here and
there around Karnikara trees, and then resorted to a place which is within the eyeshot of Seetha.
[3-42-23]

Shlok 24: With an odd lotus like hind-side that astounding deer is verily scintillating, and
it milled around the surroundings in the threshold of Rama's hermitage according to its own
delight. [3-42-24]

Shlok 25: That excellent deer beats a retreat and again returns, and meanders thus time and
again, and turns its tail for sometime only to return once again very playfully. [3-42-25]

Shlok 26: Again gambolling everywhere it sits somewhere on the ground, then, on coming to the
threshold of hermitage it goes towards herds of deer. [3-42-26]

Shlok 27- 28a: That demon who has gone into the deer-hood has gone after some herd of deer. But he
returned again though that herd followed him wanting to fraternise, in order that he shall remain
perceptible to Seetha, and he whirligiged in amusing circles while leaping and bounding to and from
that herd of deer. [3-42-27, 28a]

Shlok 28b- 29a: All the other animals moving in that forest on seeing this demon-deer with their
necks up have come close to it, and on smelling it well they are running away to all the ten
directions noticing it as a demon turned into a deer. [3-42-28b, 29a]

[Commentary] Here the animals are portrayed as better beings than humans in identifying
demons or ghosts. Though they may not know or wish to know about god, the apparent ghost scares
them. Humans apperceive neither god nor ghost because they are half of each.

Shlok 29b- 30a: Even that demon in the deer's semblance Maareecha, though indulged in killing those
forest animals, and though the other animals are touching him, he is not killing and eating them
indulgently, only for the reason of camouflaging his present nature of demon-hood. [3-42-29b,
30a]

Shlok 30b- 21a: What is more, Vaidehi with her felicitous eyes came towards trees yearning for
plucking the flowers in the same instant. [3-42-30b, 31a]

Shlok 31b- 32a: And she with her inebriating glances and delightful visage moved there about while
plucking flowers of Karnikaara, Ashoka, and of Mango trees. [3-42-31b, 32a]

Shlok 32b- 33a: That select lady who is unmeet for forest life beheld that deer which is completely
gemlike and whose limbs are surprising as though studded with pearls and gems. [3-42-32b, 33a]

Shlok 33b- 34a: And she that Seetha goggled the Golden Deer with a wide-eyed astonishment, which
deer has pretty lips and teeth, hair resembling silver and copper ores, and she indeed gazed at it
with an affinity for wildlife. [3-42-33b, 34a]

Shlok 34b- 35a: On seeing Rama's wife Seetha that highly phantasmal deer too then moved there about
as though to scintillate that woodland. [3-42-34b, 35a]

Shlok 35b: To see such a deer which is hitherto unseen, and which is as though studded with
numerous gems, the daughter of Janaka, Seetha, went in to an intense wonderment. [3-42-35b, c]

[Commentary] The stress continuously laid on the eyes of Seetha is observable, only to
conclude that 'trust not what thy eyes show you...'

[Commentary] The vaastu shaastra or the Ancient Indian Architecture lays down certain 
parameters for Towns, cities etc. Of them the township is said to be aneka naarii sambaddham nanaa 
shilpi janaiH vR^itam | kraya vikrayaiH kiirNam sarva devaiH samanvitam nagaram tu iti vikhyaatam 
adored with many ladies, many sculptors or architects, and with many deities, and where the buying and 
selling goes on it is nagaram the township.

[Commentary] The Seaports are said as: 
pattanam shR^iNu saampratam | dviipaantara gata dravya kraya vikrayikaiH yutam | pattanam tu abdhi tiire 
syaat | one which has all the above aspects but which is at seaside, it is
pattanam seaport. The township between a nagara 
and puram is kharvaTam

[Commentary] And the City is:

kraya vikrayaiH yutam naanaa jaati samanvitam | tantuvaaya samaayuktam tat puram tu vikathyateThe 
one with all the above aspects plus very many civilisations and weavers and the like craftsmen, is
purii, the city. Apart from these, the royal places, army stations etc., 
do comprise the ten varieties of urban places as said in the above verse, where the village is the first 
unit.



SARGA 43
------------------------------

[Text] On spotting the deer Seetha calls Rama and Lakshmana to have sight of it. Lakshmana immediately concludes 
it to be Maareecha, but Seetha, keeping his observation aside asks Rama to fetch it. Rama is also fascinated 
when he looked at that deer and he explains to Lakshmana as to why that particular deer is to be hunted 
down.

Shlok 1: That slender-waisted Seetha whose limbs are flawless, whose complexion is like purified gold, and who 
is presently culling flowers is highly gladdened to observe the Golden Deer that is brightened in one 
flank with the colour of gold and the other is silvery, and she shouted for attention of her husband, 
and even that of Lakshmana who is presently weaponed. [3-43-1, 2]

Shlok 3: "Oh, noble prince, come here," thus she called her husband and peered at the deer, and again she called, 
"really come with your younger brother quickly," and again gazed at the deer, and thus she oftentimes 
called and oftentimes saw the deer fondly. [3-43-3]

Shlok 4: Those manly lions Rama and Lakshmana thus bidden by Vaidehi came there exploring that place and then 
they saw that Golden Deer. [3-43-4]

Shlok 5: But Lakshmana became incredulous on seeing it and said to Rama, "I believe this deer to be that Maareecha, 
the demon." [3-43-5]

Shlok 6: "Oh, Rama, when kings engaged in hunting games were delightedly moving in the forest, this Maareecha 
killed many of them resorting to many disguises, for he is a guise-changer by his wish. [3-43-6]

Shlok 7: "Maareecha is an expert in many wiles and he has now assumed the form of this Golden-Deer, oh, manly 
lion, which is not more than the scintillating city of Gandharva-s, a city of wiles, which any trickster 
can create to make-believe. [3-43-7]

[Commentary] The 'Gandharva-city' is the name given to a make-believe formation of a city-like structure in skies 
by magicians, and presently the magicians world over are making the apparent structures to disappear, 
rather than constructing one which is un-manifest.

Shlok 8: "Oh, Raghava, this kind of amazing animal with gemlike dapples is nonexistent in the world, isn't it. 
Hence, oh, lord of the world, this is truly a phantasm. No doubt about it." So said Lakshmana to Rama. 
[3-43-8]

[Commentary] Here the timely provision of data by Lakshmana may be noticed. Rama is also aware of it, but Lakshmana 
is reminding him. Lakshmana cites even the name of Maareecha and by this, we can infer as to why Ravana 
chose Maareecha for this particular purpose. Because Maareecha has that extraordinary ability to lure 
and has a good record of wily accomplishments, Ravana chose him. Lakshmana has done his duty in presenting 
expedient data and it is up to Rama to analyse it. Rama argues on this point later in the chapter.

Shlok 9: While Lakshmana of Kakutstha-s is speaking thus, she who is self-satisfied as her heart is conjured 
by the cozenage, such a Seetha of a toothy smile deterred him and spoke. [3-43-9]

Shlok 10: "Oh, nobleman's son, that delightful deer is stealing my heart, oh, dextrous one, bring it round, it 
will be our plaything. [3-43-10]

Shlok 11: "Here in the threshold of our hermitage many animals with adorable manifestation are moving about in 
flocks and herds, say Caamara deer, like that Srimara deer. [3-43-11]

[Commentary] The chaamara is the kind of deer of species Bos grunniens and shrimara is a larger 
variety than chaamara.

Shlok 12: "Also the animals that are excellent in their form, say monkeys, are moving here. Likewise herds of 
Kinnara deer, spotted-deer, and even bears of great-might are freely moving here. [3-43-12]

[Commentary] Here the Kinnaraa-s are another kind of deer and not to be confounded with yaksha, gandharva, kinnaraa 
celestials.

Shlok 13: "As to how this extraordinary deer is appearing, oh, king, by way of its brilliance, tameness, or by 
the lustre of its skin, I have not so far seen any coequal to this. [3-43-13]

Shlok 14: "Diversely coloured, amazingly limbed, and spotted with gemlike dapples it is shining forth like a deer 
that is completely gemmy, and while nonchalantly moving before me it is enlivening the forest like the 
moon. [3-43-14]

Shlok 15: "Ah, what a form, ah, what a brilliance, what a beautiful bleat! This amazingly limbed deer is wonderful, 
and this is stealing my heart, as it were. [3-43-15]

Shlok 16: "It will be surprising if this deer draws into your capture alive and well, as it creates astonishment 
to one and all. [3-43-16]

Shlok 17: "When we return to kingdom on completing our dwelling in forest this deer becomes a masterpiece in palace-chambers 
for us. [3-43-17]

Shlok 18: "Oh, lord, the form of this deer creates an excellent jubilation to Bharata, to you the son of the nobleman, 
to my mothers-in-law, and also to me in palace-chambers. [3-43-18]

Shlok 19: "Else if that best deer does not come into you capture while alive, oh tigerly-man, at the least its 
gorgeous deerskin will be remnant of it. [3-43-19]

Shlok 20: "I wish to sit along with you on its golden deerskin, overlaying it on a seat of tender darbha grass-blades, 
in case the deer is felled. [3-43-20]

[Commentary] The seat of those that are under a vow is called bR^isii, vratiinaam aasanam bR^isii, ajina, carma, 
kR^ittiH : amara kosha 'A seat covered with darbha, the sacred grass, [and if available] a deerskin 
thereon.'

Shlok 21: "Tradition says that this sort of unruly self-seeking is unbefitting to women, yet that deer's beautiful 
body is inducing curiosity in me." Seetha said so to Rama and remained waiting for his reply. [3-43-21]

[Commentary] Seetha talked only this much and left the fulfilment of her indent to the discretion of Rama. There 
is neither demand nor compulsion to bring the deer in her talk. But we usually hear the telltale stories, 
bringing from some other texts, which say that Seetha pestered, nagged, and harassed Rama to get this 
deer. But nothing of that sort is evident from the dialogue given to her by Valmiki. She started to 
ask Rama with a suchiH smitaH 'a white smile, i.e., a toothy smile or a simpering smile' that too to 
deride the security guard, namely Lakshmana. These security personnel all over the world and in all 
situations and always forewarn the secured, and on the other hand, it is customary to the secured person 
to jump off the cordon of security, disdainful of the security measures. After all, human nature wants 
a free living. Thus, when Seetha is trying to jump off the cordon of security laid by Lakshmana, commentators 
say that she is said to have smiled scornfully. lakshmaNa vaakya shravaNa janita kopaa siitaa raamam 
eva aaha - dk 'with the anger generated on listening Lakshmana's words, Seetha spoke to Rama,' 
Whether Seetha is with kopa 'anger' or not, it is unsaid in the text.

Shlok 22- 23a: As for that deer's horns they vie with excellent sapphires, its golden coat with the glitter of tender 
sun, and its ambience with silver spots on coat with a milk way containing twinkling stars, and by that 
reason even Raghava's heart is awestruck when he saw it. [3-43-22, 23a]

[Commentary] According to this original text, Rama is more lured by the Golden Deer than Seetha, whereas later legends 
made Seetha a scapegoat. Rama too did not fancifully come under the lure but he got his own logistics 
to fall after the deer, which we come across in the following speeches of Rama. The word api 'even,' 
is a normal metrical filler at most times, but assumes importance at times. Here Rama is the all knowing 
and all deciding personality as depicted until now, and 'even' he is lured by the deer, say Maareecha's 
supernal trickery.

Shlok 23b- 24: In this way, hearing the words of Seetha and observing that wondrous deer Raghava is also amused by 
its form, and even motivated by Seetha in fetching it, he delightedly spoke this word to his brother 
Lakshmana. [3-43-23b, 24]

[Commentary] When Seetha placed her indent before Rama, Rama is speaking to Lakshmana, only to allow us to listen 
his strategy in going after the deer. atra mR^igayaa vyasana doShaan jaanan api raamo - lobhitaH 
ten ruupeNa - iti anayo uktayaa mahaa purusaanatra mR^igayaa vyasana doSaan jaanan api raamo - lobhitaH 
ten ruupeNa - iti anayo uktayaa mahaa puru//saanaam api bhavati vyasana anuruupatayaa buddhi vyaamoho 
bhavati iti suucitam - dk -

[Commentary] 'here knowing well about the blemishes of hunting games, Rama is lured, ambitioned, hankered 
after etc. By these words it is suggested that even great people are beguiled for their inclination 
in such matters - Dharmaakuutam;

[Commentary] asambhave hemamayasya jantoH tathaa api raamo lulubhe mR^igaaya | sabhaa parva - bhaarata - raamo 
hema mR^igam na vetti - - - dyuute bhraatR^i catuSTayam ca mahiSiim dharmaatmajo dattavaan | praayaH 
sat puruSo hi anartha samaye buddhyaa parityajyate - - praaciinaa

[Commentary] 'even if it is impossible to have a golden deer, Rama is lured by it for his hunting game' Maha 
Bharata, sabhaa parva ; 'Rama, unable to distinguish illusory deer [went after it...] Yudhistar staked 
all his four brothers and his queen [in dice game...] thus even great people at inopportune times loose 
their brains,' an ancient saying.

Shlok 25: "Lakshmana, behold this enthusiastic delight of Vaidehi. Oh, Soumitri, presently no other deer indeed 
with such an excellent form exists in this forest. Or else, does it exist in Nandana Gardens of Indra 
- no, it cannot be there; in the adjoins of Caitraratha Gardens of Kubera - no, it will not be there, 
then how can there be some deer on earth which is similar to this! [3-43-25, 26]

Shlok 27: "Amazing are its hairlines with hair upturned at some places and down-turned at other, and the golden 
spots embedded on the coat of the deer are glittery. [3-43-27]

Shlok 28: "See at its tongue that is exserting from its mouth while it is yawning, which is similar to the flaring 
tongue of fire and to the lightning from a cloud. [3-43-28]

Shlok 29: "Its face is like a mug made up of sapphires, its paunch is pearly and conchoidal, and whose heart is 
it that will not lured for this deer with an inexplicable beauty. [3-43-29]

Shlok 30: "On seeing at this astounding look of the deer which is golden in glitter and bejewelled numerously 
as it were, whose heart is it that will not be transported into astonishment. [3-43-30]

Shlok 31: "Kings pursuing games of hunting in great forests, oh, Lakshmana, will be felling deer either for the 
sake of flesh, or just for the purpose of sporting archery. [3-43-31]

Shlok 32: "And exerting themselves in great forests they by far amass forest produce, ores, jewels, gemstones 
and the gravel of gold. [3-43-32]

[Commentary] 'And this deer is also the produce of this forest, as such hunting this for taming or tanning is befitting 
to us, as we are princes.' One should not 'exert oneself,' or 'amass' forest produce even if he is a 
king, but collect it casually without looting it.

Shlok 33: "Everything of that wealth from forest produce will be filling the treasuries of kings, like the speculated 
objects filling the entire treasury of Shukra just by his thinking of them in his mind. [3-43-33]

[Commentary] Whatever object Shukra thinks wilfully, it becomes a reality, filling his treasury. So also, whatever 
objects the kings desire they come to reality through forest produce. This is a puranic/ legendary saying 
which Rama is quoting.

[Commentary] Or, as contained in Maha Bharata, Udyoga Parva, Suparna-Narada discourse: manuShyebhya samaadatte 
shukraH cintaa aarjitam dhanam 'the pipedreams, [the unattainable or fanciful hopes or schemes,] 
of people fill up the coffers of Shukra.'

[Commentary] Or, dhaninaam kosha vardhanam dhanam saaram 'for rich people [like kings, merchants,] coffer, 
filling, wealth, i.e., the forest produce is the best.' 'The forest produce is the best wealth for enriching 
the coffers of the kings for maintenance of kingdom, and for other rich people it is for trade etc.' 
Hence, this deer, or its deerskin is saaram 'an excellent gift' to be taken to Ayodhya on our 
return.' Rama's saying is interpreted in this way giving a high priority to forest produce.

Shlok 34: "The financial experts and the other financially well-off people say that with which aspirational activity 
an aspirant unhesitatingly scurries and achieves it, that achieved target alone is lauded to be worthwhile, 
or, as real wealth. [3-43-34]

[Commentary] To support his argument that bringing the Golden Deer shall not become a pipedream but it shall occur 
in reality, Rama is substantiating with this statement. This is called apuurva vastu sekaraNa 
'collection of valuable objects' which is a fashion to anyone, especially to kings. Then Lakshmana may 
further insist 'even then you shall not go, it is a fanciful deer/demon,' for which Rama is saying 'getting 
the un-gettable itself is worthwhile.'

Shlok 35: "This comely Vaidehi will be sitting on that invaluable golden skin of that gem of a deer along with 
me. [3-43-35]

[Commentary] Rama is not primarily bothered to tame the Golden Deer by declaring about its skin and its usage at 
this juncture. This skin alone is the 'laudable wealth' 'worthwhile object' and a 'masterpiece.'

Shlok 36: "I think the skin of Kadali deer, or of Priyaki deer, or of Praveni deer, or as a matter of fact the 
skins of best breed of deer or sheep will not be match to the deerskin of this deer, insofar as the 
soft-touch is concerned. [3-43-36]

[Commentary] Kadali, Priaki and Avi are the names of breed of deer that yield best deerskins. It is said in amara 
kosha: kadalii kandalii ciinaH ca camuuru priyakaH; amii ajina yonayaH; avayaH shaila meSa arka 
Kadali is the deer with white stripes on its neck that lives in a big burrows. Priyaki will have thick 
brown and black hair and these yield the best and soft deerskin for sitting. AviH is the sheep in breed. 
The word Praveni may perhaps not of a breed of deer as said in amara kosha: aiNeya meNyaaH carmaadyameNaH 
aiNam ubhe triSu Thus it conveys the meaning aiNeya, the best deer belonging to doe, and aiNa, 
belonging to buck. Some take this praveNi as a separate breed whose dictionary meaning is completely 
different than that of deer.

Shlok 37: "Only two divine deer are there, this magnificent deer on earth, and the other that moves in skies remaining 
in stellar region. [3-43-37]

[Commentary] The deer in skies is taken in two ways; one, the deer in the moon and the other, the Orion constellation,
mR^iga shiirSa, mR^iga shira 'deer, as its head,' i.e., the deer-like stars in the head of 
Orion, where East takes this Orion as the 'hunted' and West takes it as the 'hunter', in which 'hunting' 
is common. And Rama wants to hunt down the reality of the deer. But Lakshmana may still insist saying, 
'maybe, only these two deer are the unavailable objects. We cannot leap up to skies to catch hold of 
those deer-like stars, or the deer in the moon. Equally this tricky deer on earth is uncatchable. Thereby 
getting its skin is also that dreamy.' For this Rama explains his duty in his next course of action, 
viz., killing the demon.

Shlok 38: "You are telling me that 'this is the wizardry of the demon.' Even then, Lakshmana, if this results 
in that way as a demon's wizardry, my duty also results in the elimination of that deer. [3-43-38]

Shlok 39: "If this deer is Maareecha, this heinous and vicious-souled demon has indeed tortured many eminent sages 
earlier when was on the prowl in the forests, thus he is eliminable. [3-43-39]

Shlok 40: "He rebelliously killed many kings who are excellent archers while they were in hunting games, at least 
for that reason this bestial monster is eradicable. [3-43-40]

[Commentary] The last word in second foot mR^iga is also identifiable with 'beast' thus a bestial monster.

Shlok 41: "Demon Vaataapi who held ascetics in contempt was here earlier, and staying in the stomachs of Brahmans 
he used to come out by ripping their stomachs open and thus he was killing Brahmans, like a mare-calf 
killing its own mother at its time of birth by ripping the womb of its own mother. [3-43-41]

[Commentary] The legend of Vaataapi is said in detail in chapter 11 of this Aranya Kanda when Rama and others were 
going to Agastya's hermitage.

Shlok 42: "On one occasion after some time, that Vaataapi avariciously obtained that great-saint and the one who 
is endowed with effulgent, namely Agastya, as an eatable, but actually that demon has became an eatable 
to the sage. [3-43-42]

Shlok 43: "On observing the demon Vaataapi who is trying to assume his original form of demon in order to come 
out of his stomach, that godly saint Agastya spoke this to Vaataapi with a scornful smile. [3-43-43]

Shlok 44: " 'Oh, Vaataapi, you have irreverently eradicated the best Brahmans in this world owing to your might, 
therefore I have assimilated you.' So said sage Agastya to Vaataapi. [3-43-44]

Shlok 45- 46a: "Lakshmana, such a demon who is like Vaataapi will not be there any more. He who disregards someone 
of my kind, who always abides in righteousness and who is self-controlled, such a demon will be eliminated 
as sage Agastya has eliminated demon Vaataapi, if that demon happens to get at me. [3-43-45, 46a]

Shlok 46b- 47a: "Oh, Lakshmana, the descendent of Raghu, you stay here in all preparedness and guard Maithili steadfastly, 
whatever enterprise of ours is there that is founded in her. [3-43-46b, 47a]

[Commentary] The first foot 'she is the basis of our mission' is a debated expression. Their mission is to eliminate 
Ravana. Seetha as Vedavati, an earlier incarnation of Goddess Lakshmi, vows to eliminate Ravana when 
she comes to earth as Seetha. Then Rama should have said 'look Lakshmana, our task is to kill Ravana, 
for that Ravana has to kidnap Seetha, and to make that kidnapping possible do not guard her.' Can he 
say so? Neither Rama, nor any ordinary husband can say so. Then this predictive sentence becomes self-contrary. 
Contrariwise, taking some concessions of grammar, because most of Ramayana is un-Paninian, Rama is indirectly 
hinting Lakshmana that something is immanent, because 'after the elimination of demons like Khara, Duushana 
nothing drastic has happened, but a queer deer has come, and thus something may now happen.' Then, if 
this asyaam is given to kartavyam 'the enterprise' as tasmin then the connection 
is: asmaakam yat kR^ityam asyaam [tasmin] aayattam asaama 'for us, which, enterprise is there, 
in that, circumspect, we shall be' 'Which enterprise is there for us individually, in that we both shall 
conduct separately and circumspectly, and you do your job of guarding Seetha and I mine in bringing 
the deer or its skin, duly eliminating that conjuring demon.' In such a case, the blemish soothsaying 
or prophesising will not occur to Rama, in saying 'Seetha as the pivotal character is to be kidnapped 
by Ravana' etc. In fact, Rama is the person who is more beguiled by the deer.

Shlok 47b- 48a: "I wish to catch this deer, Soumitri, if not I will kill it, and I will be going forthwith to fetch 
the deer. [3-43-47b, 48a]

Shlok 48b- 49a: "Lakshmana, see how Vaidehi's percept is overtaken by deerskin. Indeed by the strangeness of its skin 
that deer must be a mysterious being, hence, it will not survive now. [3-43-48]

Shlok 49b- 50: "Oh, Lakshmana, apply yourself vigilantly while staying in hermitage along with Seetha. So soon as I 
go I will be felling that spotted deer with one arrow and returning quickly. [3-43-49b, 50]

[Commentary] The ambiguity is whether Rama is going for the deer, or deerskin, or for the latent demon. He is going 
for the deer epically, for the memento of deerskin to Seetha as a hero of the epic, and for the demon 
in deer, according to mythology.

Shlok 51: "Oh, Lakshmana, you be here taking care of Maithili along with the forthright, formidable and fatherly 
bird Jatayu, and be watchful and suspicious from everywhere and every split-second." Thus Rama spoke 
to Lakshmana and started to go after the deer [3-43-51]

[Commentary] Poor Seetha, she could not romanticise the Golden 
Deer better than Rama. Then it may be asked 'what is the necessity for Rama to romanticise and compare 
it to the skyey star-deer and others. Is it for the deer or for the deerskin?' This is the unanswered 
question. 'It is for the deer alone but not its skin,' said so in reply by some. If it were to be for 
the deerskin, from the view point of Rama, he could have shot his arrow from where he is standing, which 
arrow miraculously pierces any terrain, kills the deer, and safely comes back into his quiver, as in 
the case of showing his prowess to Sugreeva. Otherwise, Rama should have turned down the request of 
Seetha, as he did in the ninth chapter of this Aranya Kanda, when she was saying: 'where that weapon? 
Where this forest? Where the principles of Kshatriya? And where is the sageness? All this is inconsistent... 
By us, let the laws of the land be esteemed...' as at 3-9-27. When kings come into such a sort of allurement, 
many wise men quote this instance of Rama's going after the deer as a reminder to them, as in Maha Bharata.

[Commentary] "Impossible is the birth of a Golden Deer, even 
then Rama is lured, if time is perilous, even the best man's brain deranges.'

[Commentary] Fate harasses the faculty, faculty cannot harass 
the fate, even the cleverest Rama, went after the Golden Deer.

[Commentary] Unborn it was, none has seen yet, nor mentioned 
about it, such is the mirage of Rama. Parlous time causes perilous percipience.

[Commentary] Hence Rama's 
going after the deer is for the deerskin, on one count, and for the deer itself, on the other as affirmed 
by Lakshmana because Lakshmana never says untruth. This Maareecha is recurrently falling after Rama. 
Once an accident, twice a coincidence, but thrice... a habituation... and it become habitual for Maareecha 
to dare Rama. Hence, Rama has to do something to Maareecha, permanently.

[Commentary] The other view according to puranic/mythological 
sayings is that god endows whatever you seek. But that god alone says: 'Seek you will get it, but seek 
not by the extrinsic values of objects.' This saying has it counterpart at: 'Every one that asketh receiveth; 
and he that seeketh findeth.' St Matthew, p[Ch. 7, v. 8] The Bible. But 'seek something within the nature, 
according to your nature... but not the supernatural... for eyes belie the nature of objects...' is 
the essence here. He/she who seeks beyond means will have to suffer, either by getting it or devoid 
of it. This is said in innuendo at 3-43-33, that 'the results of pipedreams fill the coffers of Shukra.'

[Commentary] Further, because parlous 
time has come to Rama and Seetha, epically, providentially, and episodically, Rama has to move away 
from Seetha. While going after the deer, Rama says much to Lakshmana about the security to Seetha and 
also informs him that 'she is pivotal to our mission.' He did not say these many farewells when sending 
Seetha and Lakshmana for hiding in a cave at the time of elimination Khara, Duushana, and the other 
fourteen thousand demons. At one time Rama spared Maareecha's life in the forest of Tataka while guarding 
Vishwamitra's ritual, only to cause Maareecha to come now. As such, Rama has to go after Maareecha. 
Besides, Seetha or Goddess Lakshmi will let none killed in her presence.



SARGA 44
------------------------------

[Text] Rama eliminates Maareecha when he is escaping beyond reach in the form of Golden
Deer. He sports with that deer for a long time and when it is leading him away and afar from the
hermitage, he is vexed with the trickery of the deer and kills it. At the time of his death
Maareecha shouts out for Seetha and Lakshmana, as demanded by Ravana. Rama is perplexed at this
oddity of Maareecha and presumes that some danger is immanent and then returns to hermitage.

Shlok 1: Rama, the great-resplendent scion of Raghu, on instructing his brother Lakshmana in
that way securely fastened his sword with golden handle to his waist. [3-44-1]

Shlok 2: Rama whose valour is escalating then took his own insignia, the three-way arched bow
called kodanDa, and fastened two quivers and proceeded. [3-44-2]

Shlok 3: On peering at the peerless one among kings, namely Rama, who is indeed coming down
on him, that Golden Deer disappeared as if with fear and even to beguile him, and again it came
into clear visibility. And Rama speedily spurted to that place from where the Golden Deer has
firstly disappeared with securely grit sword and firmly handled bow. [3-44-3]

Shlok 4b- 5- 6- 7a: Rama the wielder of bow kept on beholding that Golden Deer which is observing him
over and over and running away into deep of the forest. In the next moment he has seen it right in
front of him as though effulgent with its marvellous form. At times he has seen it running away as
though to circumvent the fall of arrow, and at times stopping only to tantalise him. Sometimes it
appeared to be springing as though to skies in very highly perplexity of wariness. It is
disappearing somewhere in the thickets of forest, and it is putting in an appearance elsewhere in
those thickets, like the autumnal orb of the moon under the fly front of splintered clouds.
[3-44-4b, 5, 6, 7a]

Shlok 7b- 8: In a wink Rama could proximately see that Maareecha who transformed himself into the
Golden Deer, and again in a flash he appeared distantly. Thus that deer/demon has drawn off Raghava
very far from his hermitage in this hide and seek game. [3-44-7b, 8]

Shlok 9: Rama of Kakutstha is incensed as its form is spellbinding but its capture slippery,
and then verily tired as he is he stayed on a pasture taking shelter of a tree shade. [3-44-9]

Shlok 10: Nightwalker Maareecha has further maddened Rama in the guise of Golden Deer by
reappearing in his close-by, surrounded with other animals of the forest. [3-44-10]

Shlok 11: Again on seeing Rama who is stalking his catch that deer ran towards him as though
to impress with its guilelessness, and just at that moment it vanished again as if with extreme
fear. [3-44-11]

Shlok 12: Then that deer has again emerged out of the thick of trees, and on spotting it the
great-resplendent Rama has firmed up his decision to fell it. [3-44-12]

Shlok 13- 14- 15a: At that instant Raghava became highly infuriated and unholstered a holocaustic,
enemy-subjugating arrow that is similar to the flare of the sun, tautening it on his very sturdy
bow that forceful Rama forcefully outstretched the bowstring with arrow targeting the Golden Deer
alone, and released that fierily blazing arrow-missile which is carefully created by Brahma and
which is hissing like a snake. [3-44-13, 14, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: On very profoundly impaling the body of deer's form that superb arrow which is
similar to a thunderbolt has severed the heart of Maareecha in the core of deer's body. [3-44-15b,
16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: Then Maareecha is highly frenzied as his lifespan is minimised, blared a blaring
shriek, vaulted up to a height of palm-tree, and fell down onto the ground. [3-44-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18: Maareecha on his part abandoned the body of Golden Deer when he is dying. But
remembering the words of Ravana that demon gave a thought, 'how best will Seetha hasten Lakshmana
to this place, and how best Ravana can abduct Seetha in a place void of people.' [3-44-17b, 18]

[Commentary] Maareecha would have died without yelling for Lakshmana or Seetha as tutored by
Ravana because Maareecha is no real alley of Ravana. But it is said that he 'recollected Ravana's
words and thought about it.' What he really thought is the causation of death to that one who
caused his own death, namely Ravana. Ravana can do nothing to Maareecha now as Maareecha is
breathing his last. Whatever is to be done now it has t become a self-ruinous act to Ravana. Hence,
it is better to do as said by Ravana for the elimination of Ravana. So thought Maareecha.

Shlok 19: Perceptive of the time that chanced bearing his death, and wishful of the death of
Ravana too, then made a voice that is a soundalike to Raghava's voice and yelled 'ha, Seetha...'
also thus 'ha Lakshmana...' [3-44-19]

Shlok 20- 21a: When Rama's incomparable arrow has indeed shattered his crucial organ, namely the
heart, in a downright manner, then Maareecha assumed a very massive physique of a demon, abandoning
the form of Golden Deer. [3-44-20, 21a]

[Commentary] Though Maareecha assumed the form of a deer he has to retain his heart and brain
of a demon. This is the yogic way of para kaaya praveshanam 'entering other bodies.' These
assumed artificial bodies do not hold ground in nidraa, surata, maraNa dasheSu 'in sleep,
copulation and death states,' where the mind, if distracted to these states, cannot concentrate or
hold the body that is assumed by mental powers of yoga. Here no supernal god or deity is involved
to grant such a capacity but one's own practise achieves it. Whereas in other case like Ravana,
gods have bestowed boons, so he need not practise such yoga etc., as he is blessed to be above
these mortal's practises and thus can change his form and can rejoice in any state with that body
or form. This is how he abducts Seetha changing his semblances instantaneously.

Shlok 21b- 22: On seeing that demon with a fiendish look, who has fallen to earth with limbs
steeped in blood, and who is weltering on the surface of earth, Rama emotionally took flight to
Seetha reminiscing Lakshmana's words. [3-44-21b, 22]

Shlok 23: "This is the trickery of Maareecha which Lakshmana vouchsafed earlier, that has
indeed happened in that way alone, and the one whom I have killed now is none other than Maareecha.
[3-44-23]

Shlok 24: "This demon died while crying out with a blatant voice 'ha, Seetha... ha,
Lakshmana...' And on hearing this how Seetha will be? And what will be the plight of dextrous
Lakshmana?" Thus on thinking over them that righteous-souled Rama remained in a hair-raising
predicament. [3-44-24]

Shlok 26: On killing that demon in the form of Golden Deer, and also on hearing his yelling,
Rama is ensorcelled with a frantic fear caused by his own gloom. [3-44-26]

Shlok 27: Raghava then on killing another spotted deer and on taking its flesh, he hurried
himself towards Janasthaana. [3-44-27]

[Commentary] As with any other demon's death Maareecha's 
death also is eulogised as a merited one and reading or listening this is said to bring merit. 
Though these results are not said in Ramayana proper, its collateral scripts like
skaanda purana, aadhyaatma raamaayaNa etc., say them. For the 
elimination of Maareecha aadhyaatma raamaayaNa says:

[Commentary] From that body of Maareecha a divine aureole 
risen while all the world is seeing... that merged into Rama alone, causing very great 
astonishment... this is the marvel of Rama, nothing else..' So the divine beings thought seeing from 
heavens, and said 'a Brahman or a demon, or a sinner or meritorious one who cites the name of Rama 
at the time of leaving his body, he attains the Ultimate Threshold...' Blessing so, the divine 
beings returned to their abodes on seeing the salvation of Maareecha's soul in Rama.'
aadhyaatma raamaayaNa, aranya , seventh sarga/chapter.



SARGA 45
------------------------------

[Text] Seetha rebukes Lakshmana for he is still here, loitering away even after listening Rama's cry for help. 
She goes to the extent of slandering him as having intents to woo her, at the cost of Rama's life. Lakshmana 
tries to pacify her but in vain, as she persists in her rash talk. Lakshmana leaves her alone and starts 
to reach Rama, broken-heartedly.



This is a much debated chapter in Ramayana because human complexities are involved in its narration. 
The sublimity of Seetha's characterisation is disputed by her speeches in here. The question is whether 
Seetha becomes an ideal woman in view of her tongue-lashing, or not. This is as good as asking the nature 
as to 'why it thunders before a storm, scaring children, birds and calves... cannot it just shower some 
rains and go...' If anything is not done in accordance with her wish and whim, or which goes against 
her peculiar way of thinking, it is usual for a shrewd woman to tongue-lash. Here, Seetha is called 
a woman who is bhartR^i prema antha - bhartR^i kShema arthi 'blinded by the devotement to her 
husband...' 'a desirer of her husband's welfare...' even at her own risk.



This Ramayana is not the story of Rama. It is raama ayana and becomes raamaayaNa when 
compounded. Again raama is not the epical hero Rama alone. Seetha is also raamaa as 
said by Sumantra in Ayodhya, Ch. 60, 10th verse:

[Commentary] 'like an young girl Seetha, with not so young moon's face, [i.e., like the full moon,] is delighting 
herself even in uninhabited forests with Rama...'



Thus this epic is called raamaa raamayoH ayanam raamaayaNam 'the peregrination of Seetha and 
Rama...' where the first word raamaa with elongated end syllable belongs to Seetha and the 
second raama with shortened end syllable belongs to Rama, and thus this is the peregrination 
of both Raamaa and Raama. If the course of the legend has to move forward, the characters have to move, 
and if they were to move, some situations should become turning points, and this is one such situation 
occasioned through the shrewdness of Seetha. In a legendary perspective, if evil is to be eliminated, 
good has to peregrinate troublesomely, and that troublesome peregrination of Seetha, as well as that 
of Rama, is triggered off at this situation, again due to the shrewdness of Seetha. Thus, there is no 
oddity in the shrewd talk of Seetha. Some more discussion is incorporated in the endnote.

Shlok 1: On identifying the grievous voice that is identifiable with her husband's voice, Seetha spoke to Lakshmana, 
"you go at once, and check up on Raghava.' [3-45-1]

Shlok 2- 3a: "I have heard the loud yelling voice of highly fretful Rama whereby my heart, or my very entity, is 
not abiding in its place, and it will be apt of you to protect such a brother of yours who is screaming 
in the forest. [3-45-2, 3a]

Shlok 3b- 4a: "He might have come under the subjugation of demons as with a bull coming under the seize of lions, 
hence, you hurry up so as to near such a brother of yours who is seeking protection." So said Seetha 
toi Lakshmana. [3-45-3b, 4a]

Shlok 4b- 5a: Although she spoke a lot to him in this way, Lakshmana on his part has not moved out remembering his 
brother's order to stay guard to Seetha, and hence that Janaki, the daughter of Janaka, who is already 
agitated for Rama further spoke to him in the paradox of his not going out of hermitage. [3-45-4b, 5a]

Shlok 5b- 6a: "You are like a foe of your brother in friend's mien, Soumitri, as you are not making a move towards 
a brother even if he is in an emergency. [3-45-5b, 6a]

Shlok 6b- 7a: "Because of me you wish Rama to be completely destroyed, and only because of your cupidity for me you 
are not following up on Raghava. It is definite. [3-45-6b, 7a]

[Commentary] The 'real' woman in Seetha is coming out. From now on, she goes on talking unhesitatingly, unilaterally 
and even abusively because her mind is fuddled with the thought 'some damage is being done to her husband.'

Shlok 7b- 8a: " 'Raghava in direst strait' is the most liked thing to you, thus I deem, as you have no heart for that 
brother, and as you complacently stay behind even when that great-resplendent Rama is unseen. [3-45-7b, 
8a]

Shlok 8-9a: "After which helmsman you have come here that Rama is undergoing an uncertainty of life-and-death, as 
such I indeed wonder what business you have here now in staying with me at this hermitage?" Seetha spoke 
so to Lakshmana. [3-45-8, 9a]

Shlok 9b-10a: Lakshmana spoke to Seetha, the princess from Videha kingdom, who is talking deluged under tears and 
anguish in that way, as she is fretful like a she-deer. [3-45-9a, 10b]

Shlok 10b- 11a: "Oh, Vaidehi, your husband is an impossible one for vincibility by serpents, asura-s, gandharva-s, gods, 
fiends, demons, no doubt about it.

Shlok 11b- 12- 13a: "Oh, auspicious one, unmarked is some combatant who can counterattack Rama from among gods, humans, 
gandharva-s, birds, ogres, kinnaraa-s, beasts, or oh, lady, even from horrendous demons, as Rama vies 
with Indra in any given war. [3-45-11b, 12, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: "It is inapt of you to talk that way as Rama is inextirpable in a given war, and as for me, I do not 
venture to abandon you in this forest in the absence of Raghava. [3-45-13b, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: "Let the most forceful Crowns with all their military forces, or, all of the gods together with their 
heads, why they, let all the three worlds put together come mutinously, whether jointly or severally, 
Rama's prowess is irrestrainable. [3-45, 14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b-16a: "Hence, let your heart be diverted and anxiety divested, as your husband will be returning soon on killing 
that extraordinary deer. [3-45-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: "Evidently it is not the voice of Rama, nor that of any other god, but someone mimicked that voice for 
chicanery, and that must be the illusory voice of that demon Maareecha, similar in effect to the magical 
city of gandharva-s usually created by magicians in general. [3-45-15b, 16]

[Commentary] Lakshmana has repeated the word gandharva nagara which he said to Rama. This magic is said as: gandharva 
nagaram proktam indrajaalam maniiShibhiH 'magic show of showing celestial cities by magicians.'

Shlok 17-18a: "And you are an entrustment, oh, best lady Vaidehi, as the great-souled Rama has entrusted you in my 
security, as such I do not dare to leave you off now. [3-45-17, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: "Oh, gracious lady, we have become the adversaries of these night-walkers insofar as the elimination 
of Khara and others, and concerning the eradication of Janasthaana. [3-45-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: "The demons are the swaggerers in violence in great forests and they will be employing various voices. 
Therefore Vaidehi, just do not bother about it." Thus Lakshmana advised Seetha. [3-45-18b, 19, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: As for Seetha, she became furious on hearing Lakshmana's words of advice, and while her eyes are becoming 
bloodshot she spoke these rude sentences to that veracious Lakshmana. [3-45-20b, 21a]

Shlok 21b- 22: "You are a debased one devoid of mercy, thus a dreadful one, and a degrader of your dynasty, and I deem 
that you derive pleasure from fatal hardship to Rama. [3-45-21b, 22a]

[Commentary] The wording anaaryaH akararuNaarambha= dayaa prasakti rahitaH is as per the text of Govindaraja, 
while other mms have it as akaarya karaNa aarambha; a kaarya kaaraNa aarambha 'starter for 
doing an untoward deed.' From Seetha's viewpoint it is 'in wooing brother's wife you are the starter 
of an untoward deed.'

Shlok 22b- 23: "You are haranguing all these sermons only on noticing hardship to Rama. It is unsurprising that the 
pitiless ones and rivals of your kind, who always behave in a cloak-and dagger way, will tend to commit 
deadly sins, Lakshmana, and it is not uncommon. [3-45-22b, 23]

Shlok 24: "You are verily maleficent for you have singly and covertly followed Rama, who started to forests all 
alone, or instigated by Bharata, only because of me. [3-45-24]

[Commentary] The covert operation of Lakshmana as instantly surmised by Seetha is that, 'when one half-brother Bharata 
can snatch the kingdom from Rama, you, the other half-brother, can snatch away his wife, hence you have 
come with covert intentions, on your own, leaving all your kinsfolk. Or, Bharata wanted me too along 
with the kingdom, so he might have instigated you to fetch me for him, after Rama's death, thus he covertly 
sent 'you' alone.'

Shlok 25- 26a: "Whether this is an intrigue of yours or that of Bharata it is unachievable, Saumitri. How can I long 
for another commoner when I have put my faith only in the lotus-blue-complexioned and lotus-bright-eyed 
husband of mine, Rama? [3-45-25, 26a]

[Commentary] For how shall I, the chosen bride / Of dark-hued Rama, lotus-eyed, / The queen who once called Rama 
mine, To love of other men decline? - Griffith.

Shlok 26b- 27a: "If that comes to that, I will just discard my life in your presence, Soumitri do not mistake it. I 
do not eke out an existence on this earth even for a moment without Rama." Thus Seetha threatened Lakshmana. 
[3-45-26b, 27a]

Shlok 27b- 28a: When that self-mortified Lakshmana is addressed in this way with hair-raising and acerbic words by Seetha, 
he spoke to her suppliantly adjoining his palm-fold. [3-45-27b, 28a]

Shlok 28b- 29: "I do not venture to reply you Maithili, as you are like a deity to me. Women using words that are in 
a class by themselves is not at all surprising. This sort of bringing stilted words into play is the 
nature of women and it is obvious in the world. [3-45-28b, 29]

Shlok 30- 31a: "Women by their nature are unbound by the etiquette of decency, whimsical, cantankerous and they tend 
to become the artificers of vicissitudes, and oh, Vaidehi, the daughter of Janaka, indeed unbearable 
are this kind of words that are much the same as burnt iron arrows thrust in between my two ears. [3-45-30, 
31a]

[Commentary] The role of women in bringing alterations in joint families, peaceful histories or even in transcending 
legends is evident in every culture. mahaanto api hi bhidyante striibhiH adbhiH iva acalaaH | kaamandaka 
- lavaNa jalaantaa nadyaH strii bhedaantaani bandhu hR^idayaani | praaciina smR^iti - dk - 'They, 
the women, may be great beings but they tear asunder hearts, like oceans tearing great mountains.' Lakshmana 
is not eye-to-eye with Seetha and he is going on listening all her accusations with his two ears. And 
in between his two ears his conscience is there which is not permitting him to tolerate these words, 
yet he is tolerating.

Shlok 31b- 32a: "Let all of the forest-itinerants indeed listen as to how you are addressing me with bitter words, though 
I am reasoning with you conscientiously, and let them become my corroborators for the sake of justice. 
[3-45-31b, 32a]

Shlok 32b- 33a: "Fie upon you, you are acrimoniously tempered owing to your faminality, and by which impulsive reason 
you mistrust me who am presently abiding in my brother's order, may God damn you for that crotchety. 
[3-45-32b, 33a]

Shlok 33b- 34a: "I am going there where Rama is, oh, lady with best visage, you be blest, and oh, broad-eyed one, let 
all of the forest deities protect you. [3-45-33b, 34a]

Shlok 34b: "Gauging by those dangerous forebodings that are now bidding fair, can I to see you again along with 
Rama on my return, or not? That I do not know." Thus Lakshmana spoke to Seetha. [3-45-34b, c]

[Commentary] Lakshmana is repeatedly addressing Seetha as 'a broad-eyed-lady,' suggesting that 'though you have broad-eyes, 
but your mental perception is not that broad' 'as your eyes are belying your faculties.' 'And as 'the 
daughter of Janaka,' that is the 'daughter of a judicious person, yet unable to discriminate.' And as 
Vaidehi that is, one 'coming from Videha province.' Videha also means 'without body.' You are some supernatural, 
yet that demon beguiled you,' so on.

[Commentary] Lakshmana said Seetha 'be lost in desolation...' in the first instance and further said that she 'be 
blest...' and seeks the help of pastoral divinities to protect Seetha in his absence. This appears self-contradictory 
on the part of Lakshmana. But it is held correct, for he uttered derogatory words in the first instance 
as a vexed person and then, on knowing what that is suddenly uttered by him, he is correcting himself 
in saying that 'she be blest...' He wished her to prosper as she belongs to Rama. Whatever belongs to 
Rama that cannot be ridiculed, especially his mother-like elder sister-in-law.

Shlok 35: When Lakshmana spoke to that wailful daughter of Janaka, she on her part spoke this curt sentence to 
him, while tears whelmed her to a fault. [3-45-35]

Shlok 36: "Without Rama I plunge myself in River Godavari, or else I string up myself, or discard this body of 
mine from heights..." Thus Seetha started to vent out her feelings. [3-45-36]

Shlok 37: "I drink deadly poison, or I enter a flaring fire, but I will never touch another man other than Raghava. 
[3-45-37]

[Commentary] With regard to touching another man, some texts say the word kadaapi 'never' and some padaa 
api 'by foot, even.' 'I do not touch any other man even with my foot.' This signifies 'marriage.' 
In marriages there is a custom for the newly weds, like handshake and pressing toes of one another, 
in order to acclimatise one with the other's body touch. Here, if this paadaa api is taken 
as that custom in marriages. Thus she says that 'in the process of marriages such foot-pressing of bride 
and bridegroom occurs, hence I do not wish to undergo such situations.' As such, this is not mere touching 
someone with her foot.

[Commentary] These intimidations of Seetha that she will commit suicide by consuming poison, hanging, plunging in 
river, self-immolation etc., are not new to Seetha or to any woman, under these irksome situations. 
She is giving many alternatives for suicide and the last one is self-immolation. If she is not going 
to die by hanging herself, or by consuming poison, or by drowning in river, then the question of self-immolation 
comes up. But she lists all of them in her anguish for Rama. With the same impetuosity she jumps into 
fire in the episode of agni praveshanam after war, when Rama belittles her. There also, she 
orders the very same Lakshmana to arrange pyre for her, disregarding her own accusations made at Lakshmana, 
at this situation.

Shlok 38: Seetha on declaring to Lakshmana in this way, she who is anguished and weeping bitterly, then started 
to smite her belly with both of her palms in a heightened agony. [3-45-38]

Shlok 39: Observing the agonised aspect of Seetha that cheerless Saumitri started to cheer her up by repeatedly 
informing that her husband Rama will come soon. Even then Seetha has not spoken in the least to the 
brother of her husband, and maintained a silence of antipathy. [3-45-39]

Shlok 40: But then, holding Seetha in usual reverence that self-respectful Lakshmana briefly came to her fore 
making a reverential palm-fold that briefly, and then he proceeded to the proximity of Rama, while repeatedly 
looking back at that lonely lady in the thick of forest. [3-45-40]

[Commentary] Till now Lakshmana is at her behind or at her sideways, as he usually stands a foot behind Rama or Seetha, 
and now came to her fore to revere her vis-Ã -vis and made a semi-salute, i.e., briefly and 
briskly adjoined and disjoined his palms, without bringing the joined palms up to his heart or his face. 
Bringing the folded palms up to one's own heart is suggestive of 'pouring forth one's own heart' at 
the other, which is known in prayers as iungo manus ante pectus and if it is lifted up to forehead, 
it is suggestive of 'concentrating with whole of the mind,' and if hands are totally lifted into air 
it is for the god unknown. But here this iungere manus is neither ante pectus, infra pectus,
nor supra abdomen but a quick gesture. He is performing an iSTa namaskaara 'un, 
interested, greeting...' 'a half-hearted gesture' like a 'cold-handshake' rather than a 'warm' one because 
he is now sent by her compulsively and compulsorily.

[Commentary] Indian woman is no sacred cow. For that matter, no woman is of that kind, unless compulsorily conditioned 
to be like that. A woman can be said as cow-faced-tigress, as: go mukha vyaaghra, [not in dissent.] 
She prowls, growls and howls at others if her interests are contradicted. Thus, Seetha's is not only 
a sacred cow but also a shrewd lioness-princess, and her rash talking is not new or instantaneous at 
this place alone. She said something against Kaikeyi with Sumantra, which, Sumantra does not report 
to Kausalya in Ayodhya Kanda, chapter 60, and verse 14. One full chapter, Aranya Kanda of 9th is catered 
to Seetha's haranguing Rama, when Rama wanted to wage an unprovoked war. She does not spare even her 
own husband, if the contemplated deed is contrary to her thinking, and because she is countering her 
own husband she includes a saving clause, 'I have spoken in all my womanliness... it is up to you to 
decide....' otherwise it will be a straight tongue-lashing. Thus talking riff-raff with Lakshmana is 
no great surprise.

[Commentary] Further, she is angering through perplexity caused by the hearing a help cry similar in tone with her 
husband's voice: bhartR^i aarta svara sadR^isham aakrandanam aakraNya vidiirNa hR^idayaa hR^idaya 
dayitu premNaa kartavyam ajaananaa jaanakii - - - sam utpanna kopayaa siitayaa - bhaaShitam - dk 
Seetha said mama hetoH praticchannaH 'for me you are covertly behaving...' and Lakshmana, who 
is famous for his rashness also said to Seetha tiikShNaa bhedakaraaH striyaH 'women are the 
severe wreckers...' of households, kingdoms etc., remembering Sage Agastya's saying in Aranya, Ch. 13 
verse 6: 'With the dangling of hundreds of streaks of thunderbolt and also a weapon's incisiveness, 
and also with the speediness of an eagle and wind's gust, the women are conformable...'

[Commentary] Besides, Seetha vowed to offer many oblations to Ganga, when crossing that river to enter the deep of 
forests in Ayodhya II, Ch. 52, verses 87-90: suraa ghaTa sahasreNa maamsa bhuuta odanena ca yakShyaami 
aham 'I will offer thousand pots of liquor, meaty food, if, my husband and I return safely...' 
Even though Shiromani Vyaakhya says that these are not liquor pots or it is not the meat food, yet they 
are some offerings to be made by Seetha to Ganga, if they return. She uses many 'if' clauses while praying 
thus, for the safety of her husband. What will become of them, if Rama's life itself is at stake?

[Commentary] Here, both Seetha and Lakshmana, are accusing each other. It is not reiterated elsewhere in Ramayana, 
and hence some say that this episode is an interpolation. 'Can these two go on narrating this scandalous 
dialogue to somebody, detailing how each accused the other...' is the ensuing question. This episode 
has happened in between these two and it does not merit a discussion with somebody else, because such 
a discussion will attract many cha, cha-s, and chi, chi--s for Seetha, hence this 
is neither an interpolation nor a repeatable episode.

[Commentary] Then the commentator concludes in saying that each of them is right in his/her way and in emotion, situation 
and portent. siitaa vacanasya bharti aarta shabda shravaNa samjaata kheda vashena aapadi raamo avashyam 
samrakShaNiiya iti etat abhipraayakatvaat | lakShmaNa vacanam api ayukta tara siitaa vacana shravaNa 
janita kopa vashena pravR^ittam | agastya vacanam tu svataH saralaa siitaa iti abhipraayakam iti na 
virodhaH - - dk

[Commentary] Later, Seetha repents for her rash talk with Lakshmana in yuddha kaaNDa, Ch. 113, verses 40, 45-46, 
saying:

[Commentary] 'When my fate is against me, and when my earlier sins [of finding fault with Lakshmana,] have acquired 
this [incarceration in Lanka...] one has to reap the results of one's own faults... a sinner, or a do-gooder, 
or one undergoing a capital punishment shall be treated kindly... who is he/she that does not offend...'

[Commentary] These are the very same words of Sugreeva in Kishkindha, Ch. 36, verse 11: "Either in faith or in friendliness 
if I have overstepped, in the least, that may be pardoned for I am an attendant of yours... for, none 
is unoffending...' All this culminates into the saying 'to err is human...'

[Commentary] On the other hand, in the perspective of mythology, the time has come for Seetha to go to Lanka, in 
order to effectuate her curse to Ravana as Vedavati, where Vedavati cursed Ravana, 'I will be the root 
cause for your total elimination... as Seetha...' For such a transit, Rama shall go away from her, for 
that she wanted that golden deer and as a good husband Rama ran after it. But this security guard is 
an obstinate obstacle than Rama and he will not go away from here, because he has to keep custody of 
his brother's entrustment. Unless such unbearable words are spoken to a self-respectful person like 
Lakshmana, he doe not stir out. To stop his leeching onto her, she had to talk in an abnormal way, which 
made him to go away, though reluctantly, and which paved the way for Ravana's entry. If the Golden Deer 
is not there, Rama will not go, if Rama's voice is not heard Lakshmana cannot be sent, and if Lakshmana 
does not go, Ravana will not come... then a blemish called anavasthaa doSha -- ad infintum...occurs 
to Ramayana. If we do not mind to end Ramayana in that way, Ravana will be ruling high, even today...



SARGA 46
------------------------------

[Text] Ravana praises Seetha's beauty by extolling every limb of hers, though he enters like a Brahman sanyaasi, 
a friar. He indulges in a most untoward laudation that is unbefitting for a saintly and elderly almsman. 
Unable to refute him, because he is in such a pious garb, she had to invite him as an untimely guest.

Shlok 1: Raghava's younger brother Lakshmana is very much infuriated at Seetha who spoke to him rudely, as such 
he journeyed towards Rama at once as though he is yearning to see Rama immediately, albeit his heart 
wanted him to stand guard to Seetha. [3-46-1]

Shlok 2: Quickly taking hold of intervallic time then the ten-headed Ravana approached Vaidehi adopting an aspect 
of a sanyaasi, a meandering Brahman friar. [3-46-2]

Shlok 3- 4a: That sanyaasi is now cloaked in smooth silky saffron, his head-hair is neatly tufted, sandals are wooden, 
umbrella is on right shoulder, and on his left shoulder a shaft of sanyaasi is shouldered, onto which 
his handy water vessel is hooked, and he proceeded towards Vaidehi in a mien of meandering sanyaasi. 
[3-46-3, 4a]

[Commentary] There are many dress rules to a sanyasi 'the Hindu sanyaasi' where the main items are, as said by Sage 
Angiirasa: brahma suutram 
tridanDam ca vastram jantu nivaaraNam | shikyam paatram bR^isiim caiva kaupiinam kaTi veShTitam 
'sacred thread, three-shafts, saffron clothing, deerskin, handy water vessel, grass-mat, loin-cloth, 
girdle-cloth... by these he will be known as a real sanyasi 'Hindu sanyaasi.' Out of all these items, 
the shafts make a difference. Vaishnavaite sanyaasi-s handle three shafts tied into one, and the three 
are symbolic to cit, acit, iishvara 'animate, inanimate, and lord...' and on this Manu says
vaak daNDaH 
ca mano daNDaH kaaya daNDaH tathaiva ca | yasya ete nihitaa buddhau sa tridaNDii ca ucya te 
the word daNDa means 'repressing, suppression, control...' thus a sanyaasi has to control his 'speech, 
mind, and body... by that alone he is renowned as sanyasi... Manu. As such, Ravana is in the getup of 
an unmistakable Brahman sanyaasi, with an unbridled tongue.

Shlok 4b- 5a: As with a pitchiest gloom overcoming the sunless and moonless lively eventide, that great-mighty Ravana 
came over to Vaidehi in that forest, when she is without two of the brothers, namely Rama and Lakshmana. 
[3-46-4b, 5a]

Shlok 5b- 6a: As a sinister planet looks over Star Rohini when she is devoid of Moon, that extremely sinister Ravana 
then looked over the glorious and youthful princess Seetha. [3-46-5b, 6a]

[Commentary] Rohini is the principle star and dear wife of the Moon will be in lunar asterism of the same name, and 
when she comes in the view of planets like Saturn and Mars astrology predicts earthly havocs. Hence, 
Ravana is compared with such a planet and Seetha with Rohini.

Shlok 6b- 7a: On observing ferocious Ravana whose activities are iniquitous, the trees of Janasthaana are not in full 
sway, nor the wind is in full swing. [3-46-6b, 7a]

Shlok 7b- 8a: On seeing him who is seeing with his bloodshot eyes, River Godavari too is frightened and started to 
rush off quietly, whose onrush will be rapid otherwise. [3-46-7b, 8a]

[Commentary] The reaction of the trees, wind, and river is as said by gods to Brahma in Bala Kanda, at 1-15-10: "Surya, 
the Sun will not verily parch Ravana. Maarutha, the Air will not surge at his sides. On seeing Ravana, 
the lord of the undulating, drifting waves, Ocean... will not pulsate either, and will hide the undulating 
waves, for the waves are his wives, and Ravana may abduct them... like Seetha."

Shlok 8b- 9a: In the meanwhile the Decahedron demon Ravana, who is all the while waiting for some lapse of Rama, neared 
Vaidehi in the getup of a sanyaasi. [3-46-8b, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: That disgraceful Ravana made advances in a graceful mien of Brahman almsman to Vaidehi who is thinking 
over her husband, like the slow moving Saturn making advance to Star Citra which will be ominous. [3-46-9b, 
10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: Like a wellspring shrouded by grass, enshrouded in a decent getup of a Brahman friar, in a trice Ravana 
leeringly stood before of Vaidehi, the admirable wife of Rama. [3-46-10b, 11a]

[Commentary] This idiomatic usage of tR^iNa kuupa which draws upon straw, is held high by Dr. Satya Vrat, which is 
repeated often in Ramayana. He says 'Probably Kalidasa too was inspired by this very expression of Valmiki 
when he put it in the mouth of Shakuntala as she was being repudiated by Dushyanta:
ko anyo dharma 
kancuka praveshinaH tR^iNa kuupa upama asya tava anukaari bhaviShyati - abhij~naana shaakuntalam 
Act 5.

Shlok 11b- 12: While standing before her then Ravana eyed at the auspicious wife of Rama, whose lips and teeth are 
fine, visage is shiny like a full moon, and who is presently tortured by her tearful lamentation and 
sitting in the straw-cottage, and he approached that lotus-petal eyed Vaidehi who is dressed in ochry 
silks, as that night-walker is gladdened at his heart for her solitude. [3-46-11b, 12,13]

Shlok 14: He who is hit by the arrows of Love-god that king of demons Ravana, on seeing Seetha entered resonating 
the resonances of Vedic-hymns as precursory in seeking alms, and spoke these well-mannered sentences 
to her who is in solitariness. [3-46-14]

Shlok 15: Ravana really acclaimed her who is an excellent one in all the three worlds, beaming forth with the 
beauty of her body, and who is like Goddess Lakshmi but for Divine-lotus as Her settle, for Seetha is 
devoid of her settling, namely Rama. [3-46-15]

Shlok 16: "Glittering like the glitter of gold, silkened in ochry silks, you are like a lotus-tendril garlanded 
with divine lotuses as your ensemble, who are you?" Thus Ravanan started addressing Seetha [3-46-16]

[Commentary] The beautiful outfits on this lotus-stalk like Seetha are her mukha kamala, netra kamala, kara kamala, 
paada kamala... 'lotus-eyes, lotus-face, lotus-stalk like hands and lotus-feet and other limbs...' The 
word padmini also means a 'lake' besides the runner of lotus plant. The first compound is also read 
as: raupya kaancana aabhaa meaning 'shining like silver and gold...' but it is in limited mms and with 
very limited use.

Shlok 17: "Oh, rosy faced one, are you the personified numen of Respect, Renown or Resplendence, or the Felicitous 
Lakshmi herself, or oh, curvaceous one, are you a nymphal Apsara, or the numen of Benefactress, or a 
self-motivated woman, or Rati Devi, the consort of Manmatha, the Love God. [3-46-17]

[Commentary] These three attributes are as informed by gods to Vishnu about the three wives of Dasharatha at 
1-15-20, as: hrii, HR^illekha, virtue, modesty, uprightness... shrii, shriikaara 
affluence, prosperity and also suggestive of resplendence, radiance of that prosperity or effluence 
and kiirti fame, renown, glory... a bhuuti, vibhuuti is accordance, give-all, 
fortune. The ash applied on forehead in worships is to be applied with a verse bhuutir bhuutikar 
iishvarii... and for each of these attributes, a presiding deity is there with the same name. 
Here the hrii is also taken to mean bhuu devi 'Mother Earth' another wife of 
Vishnu. The addressing varaarohe etc., are the attributes of the addressees as a beautiful 
woman in the group of: varaarohaa, matta kaashinii, uttamaa, vara varNiniii - amara kosha

Shlok 18: "Your teeth are evenly, smooth and their tips are like jasmine buds, and your whitish broad eyes are 
spotless, reddish at ends, and pupils are black. [3-46-18]

Shlok 19- 20: "Your hips are beamy, thighs burly akin to elephant's trunks, and these two breasts of yours that are 
ornamented with best jewellery are rotund, rubbing and bumping each other, and they are swinging up 
and up, their nipples are brawny and jutting out, and they are smoothish like palm-fruits, thus they 
are covetable for they are beautiful. [3-46-19, 20]

Shlok 21- 22a: "Oh, allurer, your smile is alluring, teeth are alluring, and your eyes allure, oh, beauty, your waist 
is palmful, your hair velvety, your breasts are jostling, and you rob my soul as a spate robs riverbank. 
[3-46-21, 22a]

Shlok 22b- 23a: "I have not hitherto seen any earthly female with this kind of features on the face of earth; or, a 
goddess - no; a gandharva female - no; yaksha female - no; kinnaraa female - no, none whosoever! [3-46-22b, 
23a]

Shlok 23b- 24a: "I marvel why an excellent one in all the three worlds by her features, more so, fragile and youthful 
as yourself should be living here in the thick of forest. [3-46-23b, 24, 25a]

Shlok 25b- 26a: Such as you are you go back, let safety betide you, as you are unsuited to live in here, for this forest 
is the dwelling for ghastly demons who by their wish will be changing their guise. [3-46-24b, 25a]

Shlok 25b- 26a: "Delightful rooftops of skyscrapers, flourishing and richly fragranced pleasure-gardens of cities alone 
are meetly to you to saunter. [3-46-25b, 26a]

Shlok 26b- 27a: Oh, beauteous lady, I opine that only best garlands, best scents, best foodstuffs, best clothing are 
meetly to you, oh, lady with black pupils, hence it is meet and right to you to have a best husband.



"Getting at you, the garlands, scents, foodstuffs, or clothing, they all become the best, because you 
are the best beauteous one, as such, he alone becomes a best person who gets you as his wife, and it 
is meet and right to you to choose such a husband, [aside: me alone.] [3-46-26b, 27a]

Shlok 27b- 28a: "Oh, curvaceous lady, who are you? Oh, one with an impeccable smile, do you belong to Rudraa-gods, or 
Marut-gods, or to Vasu-s? To me you are beaming forth like a goddess. [3-46-27b, 28a]

[Commentary] Vividly: 'your kind of female is unspotted by me among humans, so you must be some goddess, but I 
have marked all gods and there I did not find you. This province belongs to demons. As such, gods, 
gandharva-s, kinnaraa-s and others cannot enter this place, let alone the gods from Shiva's side, 
because Shiva is the Ultimate for demons. If so, do you belong to ekaa dasha rudraa-s 
eleven Rudraa-s? Or, because Air can circulate here, do you belong to any of the forty-nine 
marut gaNaa-s, Wind-gods? Or, because earth has ancient connections with aSTa vasu-s, 
eight-Vasu-s, do you belong to any one of them?' Further, Seetha is not smiling throughout this 
chapter as her mind is set on her husband's safety. Nevertheless Ravana assumes that if Seetha 
smiles, that smile will be impeccable.

Shlok 28b- 29a: "This is the dwelling-place of demons, and no goddess, nor a gandharva, nor a kinnara can arrive here, 
but how you have come here? [3-46-28b, 29a]

Shlok 29b- 30a: "Here, simians, lions, leopards, tigers, likewise other predators, bears, tigers, vultures will be moving. 
How you are not frightened from them? [3-46-29b, 30a]

Shlok 30b- 31a: "Being alone in this forest, oh, lady with a lovely face, how you are unafraid of horrendous and mighty 
elephants possessed of rut? [3-46-30b, 31a]

Shlok 31- 32b: "Oh, auspicious lady, who are you? Whose are you? Also from where are you? And being lonely, what for 
you are moving in dreadful Dandaka forest that is adored by demons?" Thus Ravana spoke to Seetha. [3-46-31, 
32b]

Shlok 32b- 33: When the wicked minded Ravana praised her in this way, Vaidehi the princess from Mithila has seen him 
who has arrived in the getup of Brahman and started to revere him with all the respects affordable to 
a casual guest. [3-46-32b, 33]

Shlok 34: She firstly fetched a seat him, then invited him with water for feet-wash, and then said to him who 
looked gracious in his bearing, 'alms are ready.' [3-46-34]

Shlok 35: Maithili explored him who arrived with the features of a Brahman, with a saffron-robe and alms-bowl, 
and finding no reason to refute him flatly, as he has come like a Brahman, she invited him as a Brahman.



Maithili explored him who arrived with the features of a Brahman, with a saffron-robe and alms-bowl, 
and as he came with an unimperilling appearance of a Brahman, she invited him as she would 
ordinarily invite a real Brahman. [3-46-35]

[Commentary] Did she recognise Ravana as a pseudo-Brahman or not... is the doubt raised by this verse, because 
different texts use different compounds apaaya a darshanam.... upaaya a darshanam etc. It 
is concluded that she, for sure, identified him as a pseudo-Brahman, because she has seen many such
sanyasi-s while she was in Mithila. Hence she is said here as Maithili because she 
hails from Mithila and her father's court was full with these sanyasi-s, yati-s, parivraajaka-s.
Then it is questioned as to why she invited him, though recognised him as a pseudo-Brahman. For 
this Govindaraja says: kaaSaaya daNDa maatreNa yatiH 
puujyo na samshayaH | 'By spotting the saffron robe alone, a sanyasi is venerable...'

[Commentary] Then, another doubt is raised as to how she noticed him to be pseudo- sanyasi . For this it 
is said  raatri advaanam yaanam ca 

strii kathaa laulyam eva ca | mancakam shukla vastram yatiinaam patanaani SaT || 'Meandering during night, using vehicles, showing interest in episodes relating to women, and 
relations with women, using a cot to sleep, wearing white cloths... these six show the downfall of 
his sanyaasi-hood...' Ravana is indulged in strii kathaa in the whole of this chapter, in 
admiring at her lips, breasts, thighs etc., and no usual swasti vacana, shubha aashiis 
'blessings...' are uttered by him and thus Seetha could discern him to be a pseudo- sanyasi.

[Commentary] Though knowing him as such, why should she revere him at all, is another question. What else she 
could do as his appearance itself is uddveSTum a+shakyam 'irrefutable appearance of a 
Brahman sanyasi...' hence, somehow some time is to be gained until the arrival of Rama or 
Lakshmana. Otherwise, this pseudo-sanyasi may cause any pseudo-problem that she cannot 
solve. For this, the reply is at the word in the last verse haritam dadarsha... 'only 
greenery is seen by her not Rama nor Lakshmana...' And in the next verse itself she is addressing 
him as a "Brahman...' but not with the titles like sanyasi or yatiishvara, paramahamsa, 
parivraajaka etc. A Brahman alone is eligible to take up sanyaasa 
'Hindu-sanyaasi-hood...' not Kshatriya or others. Hence, she concluded him to be Brahman. When once 
the sanyaasi-hood is taken he is no more a Brahman and his bodily being neutralises in the Absolute, 
and such a sanyaasi shall drag on his body, without comfortable bodily needs, until his natural 
death. But Seetha is addressing him contrary to his stance.

Shlok 36: "Oh, Brahman, this is the Darbha-grass-seat and you be seated comfortably, here is water, receive it 
for hand and feet wash, here is the forest grown victuals for your sake... dine on them relaxedly..." 
Thus Seetha said to Ravana. [3-46-36]

Shlok 37: Ravana thoroughly observed that wife of the king, Maithili, when she invited him talking civilities 
contextual in inviting a guest, that too Brahman sanyasi, and he firmed up his mind to abduct her even 
forcibly, and started to dedicate himself for destruction. [3-46-37]

Shlok 38: Then she looked forward for her shapely husband who has gone on a hunting game, and who must be returning 
along with Lakshmana, and though she looked intently she could only see the green backdrop of that great 
forest, but not Rama or Lakshmana. [3-46-38]



SARGA 47
------------------------------

[Text] The debate of Seetha and Ravana has started, as Ravana wished to woo Seetha. In the first instance Seetha 
believes him to be a Vedic Brahman but insists to know about him. Ravana reveals his identity and asks 
her to become his wife. Thereupon she goes into a frenzied state and brainstorms Ravana in all her curtness.

Shlok 1: When Ravana whose intention is to abduct her has enquired thus, then on the basis of his Brahman friar's 
mien Seetha informed about herself on her own. [3-47-1]

Shlok 2: Thinking briefly that, 'he is a Brahman and an untimely guest, he will indeed curse me if he is not 
replied,' Seetha spoke this sentence. [3-47-2]

[Commentary] A lie cannot be uttered to a sanyaasi, much less to a Brahman. This friar appears as someone who is 
attired as a sanyaasi to fill his stomach. But he is Brahman, because he came booming Vedic hymns, which 
no other lesser Brahman can do. Thus, he is someone with a perfect Vedic background... and according 
to the saying:  yatiinaam puujanam kaaryam striyaa vaa puruSena... ' an ascetic is to 
be revered either by a lady or a gentleman...' and thus he cannot be turned out saying 'my husband is 
not at home...' and if he is neglected he may curse...' these are the criss-cross thoughts of Seetha 
at that moment. Ghastly Viradha boldly carried her off at one time, but she is yet to see the cunningness 
of a demon. So with a half-belief and half-heart she started to talk to him.

Shlok 3: "I am the daughter of noble-souled Janaka, the king of Mithila, by name I am Seetha, and the dear wife 
and queen of Rama, let safety betide you. [3-47-3]

[Commentary] Here some versions use bhaaryaa 'wife' while some use mahiSii 'queen...' and this
bhadram te coupled with jihiirSuNaa 'abduction wisher...' is taken as a forewarning 
to Ravana, as she immediately says who her husband is, as she is aware that this friar is Ravana. Then 
it implicitly means 'you who wish to abduct me, think twice, for my husband is Rama, and let safety 
prevail on whole of your dynasty, for it is hard to deal with Rama or with his dear queen-wife...'

Shlok 4: "On residing in the residence of Ikshvaku-s in Ayodhya for twelve years, I was in sumptuosity of all 
cherishes while relishing all humanly prosperities. [3-47-4]

[Commentary] Mythically Seetha is Goddess Lakshmi and an accorder of prosperity. Here she is saying that she had 
to enjoy 'humanly indulgences...' because her husband incarnated himself as a man, and since she had 
to enjoy along with him in her in-law's place, she enjoyed those luxuries. Or, if this is read as
a+ maanuSa bhogaan 'superhuman delights...' [of course, not 'inhuman delights...'] she enjoyed 
heavenly comforts as she was enjoying as Lakshmi in vaikunTha 'Milky Ocean of Vishnu.' And 
then, she is indirectly telling Ravana that she has come now as Seetha, after immolating herself as 
Vedavati, in an earlier incarnation, only to end Ravana.

Shlok 5: "In the thirteenth year the lordly king Dasharatha deliberated together with his imperial ministers 
to anoint Rama as Crown Prince of Ayodhya. [3-47-5]

Shlok 6: "When Raghava's anointment was being organised my venerable mother-in-law known as Kaikeyi begged her 
husband Dasharatha for a boon. [3-47-6]

Shlok 7- 8a: "Restraining my veracious father-in-law by a good deed once done by her in his respect, Kaikeyi besought 
two boons from him, namely expatriation of my husband, and anointment of her son Bharata. [3-47-7, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9- 10a: " 'If Rama is anointed now, come what may I will not eat, sleep, or drink, and my life ends this way,' 
thus Kaikeyi was adamantine, and the king and my father-in-law entreated her who is nagging with meaningful 
riches, but she did not make good on that entreaty. [3-47-8b, 9, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11: "My great-resplendent husband was of twenty-five years of age at that time, and to me eighteen years 
are reckoned up from my birth. [3-47-10b, 11a]

[Commentary] These foots are said to be nonexistent in some more ancient mms. But lengthy narrations are there in 
calculating the age of Rama and Seetha, at this point of legend with these stanzas. The letter bha
in the line mama bhartaa mahaatejaa is the ninth letter of Gayatri hymn and thus the ninth 
book of Ramayana with thousand couplets is started from here. The whole of Ramayana is with twenty-four 
thousand verses and Gayatri hymn has twenty-four letters, and each book of Ramayana contains a thousand 
verses, starting with each letter of Gayatri. This is the then classification of the cantos of this 
epic and such grouping of verses is nonexistent now.

Shlok 11b: "Rama - thus he is exalted in the world, an unambiguous, unblemished, unsullied one, and a broad-eyed 
ambidextrous one, who delights in bringing universal welfare, is my husband. [3-47-11b, 12a]

[Commentary] The dexterity of an archer depends mainly on his sighting and targeting eye. Hence, the eyes and dexterity 
are to be coupled instead of cleaving them as two attributes of Rama. Otherwise, in Seetha's saying 
that 'my husband is a broad-eyed one...' it does not make any sense to Ravana, because Ravana's eyes 
are much more bigger and bloodshot. Thus 'my ambidextrous husband's eyes are broad puNDariika vishaala 
akshaH, and those eyes are a couple of fish-eye lenses of a camera and can view in 360Âº, thus you 
cannot escape their target, in any angle...' Further, these and some more attributes in the coming verses 
like simha uraska etc., they are the very same words coined by Sage Narada, while informing 
Valmiki about Rama in the first chapter of Bala Kanda. Some think such repetitions are essentially Homeric. 
But in Indian scripts they are not mere repetitions but reiteration of the very same concept in the 
very same words, which is not an epical flaw in view of the ruling aadaraat punarukti, aadaraat 
dvirukti... 'an affectionate reiteration...' Hence, the very same words are put on the tongue of 
the principle character, Seetha.

Shlok 12b- 13a: "But Rama's father Dasharatha was lovesick for Kaikeyi and to fulfil her desired aspiration that great 
king did not anoint Rama. [3-47-12b, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: "When Rama arrived in the presence of his father, Kaikeyi readily and decidedly spoke these words to 
my husband. [3-47-b, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15b: " 'What your father has proclaimed, oh, Raghava, that may be heard from me. He said, 'let this thornless 
kingdom be accorded to Bharata.' [3-47-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: "And you, oh, Kakutstha Rama, indeed have to inhabit the forests for nine plus five years, hence you 
repair to forests and redeem your father from the remorse of perjury.' [3-47-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: " 'As an unfearing one from any quarter and as a resolute one in his pledge my husband Rama said 'so 
be it' to Kaikeyi and followed her dictate. [3-47-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18a: "My husband is evermore a renderer but not a recipient, and forever he speaks truth, and not the untruth, 
least of all. Oh, Brahman, this is the unalterable and unsurpassable vow of Rama. [3-47-17b, 18a]

[Commentary] In Maha Bharata Dharmaraja is informed that 'a king shall give, but he shall not beseech, he can perform 
a Vedic Ritual but cannot make it performed by others, he can learn Veda-s, but cannot teach them, he 
shall endeavour to govern the people [properly...] dadyaat raajaa na yaaceta yajeta na yaajayeta 
| na adhyaapayet adhiyiita prajaan ca paripaalayet || bhaarata - raaja dharma

Shlok 18b- 19a: "One known as Lakshmana is such a Rama's brother from another mother, and he is a valorous one, tigerly-man, 
and an eliminator of enemies in war. [3-47-18b, 19a]

[Commentary] A stepmother is called as vi maata or dvaimaata and it is said vaimaatreyo vimaatR^ija 
- amara kosha one is other mother, the other is second-mother, both are the nomenclatures of a 
stepmother.

Shlok 19b- 20a: "He who is known as Lakshmana, a follower of virtue and steadfast in his commitment, followed Rama handling 
his bow as a helpmate, when Rama was proceeding to forests along with me. [3-47-19b, 20a]

[Commentary] Some texts use the word brahma caarii 'celibate' basing on the word Rama used when saying about 
Lakshmana to Shuurpanakha about Lakshmana as apuurvii while some others use as above.

Shlok 20b- 21a: "Because Rama always abides in probity and resolutely vowed to it, he entered Dandaka forest in the 
aspect of a tufty haired saint along with me and his brother. [3-47-20b, 21a]

Shlok 21b- 22a: "Such as we are, oh, eminent Brahman, we three are moving about the impenetrable Dandaka forest just 
by our own mettle as we fell down from kingdom owing to Kaikeyi. [3-47-21b, 22a]

Shlok 22b- 23: "Be comfortable for a moment, here it is possible for you to make a sojourn, and soon my husband will 
be coming on taking plentiful forest produce, and on killing stags, mongooses, wild boars he fetches 
meat, aplenty. [3-47-22b, 23]

Shlok 24: "Such as you are, oh, Brahman, you may make mention of your name, parentage and caste, in their actuality. 
For what reason you are wandering in Dandaka forest lonesomely?" Thus Seetha questioned Ravana. [3-47-24]

[Commentary] She is addressing him as 'oh, Brahman...' and yet asking his caste. This is a tricky stanza. This implies 
her knowledge and/or ignorance about Ravana. As a housewife, it is a natural question to be put to an 
out-of-way friar moving in the deep of forests. Here, neither a village, nor a single family, nor even 
a human being is available to accord alms, and this odd almsman is moving here who is supposed to move 
about villages as said: bhiksha artham graamam pravishet.. Or, she must be asking him about 
his caste, creed etc., when he was a householder. But it is out of place. On the other hand, if Seetha 
is from a well-trained family, she is not supposed to question the caste, creed, and name of a real 
sanyaasi. Again, she is asking him to reveal himself 'in essence, truthfully.' She might have thought 
him to be a cursing Brahman in the first instance, but she might have found him out to be a pseudo-sanyaasi. 
Now that she is slowly realising that he may not be a proper Brahman either, she may be asking him straightforwardly. 
Because Ravana is coming out of Brahman's guise in next two stanzas, it is said that she pointedly asked 
him as above.

Shlok 25: Ravana, the great-mighty king of demons, brusquely replied Seetha, the wife of Rama, while she is still 
speaking in this way. [3-47-25]

Shlok 26: "Oh, Seetha, of whom all the worlds composed of gods, demons and humans are highly startled, I am that 
sovereign of hosts of demons, known as Ravana. [3-47-26]

Shlok 27: "On seeing you, oh, impeccable one, glittering with golden complexion and attired in ochry-silks, I 
derive no pleasure in my wives. [3-47-27]

[Commentary] Ravana as a devotee of Lakshmi said the above as a renouncer. tvaam dR^iSTvaa 'on seeing you...' 
after a long time... svakeSu 'in my kith and kin...' daareSu wives...' ratim
'pleasure, involvement...' na adhigacChaami 'not, I attain...' 'On seeing you, I no longer 
can attain pleasure with my kith and kin, or with my wives... for I have seen my ultimate motherly goddess... 
thus I am ready to renounce this accursed being of Ravana...' Maheshvara Tirtha.

Shlok 28: "You become my prime queen above all the choicest women with superior status, whom I have appropriated 
from here and there. [3-47-28]

[Commentary] Ravana as devotee is saying: aaR^itaanaam uttamam striiNaam 'To all of the choicest women appropriated 
by me...; mama to me'; agra mahiSiiyaa 'to the one who is my prime queen'; tasyaaH 
ca mama ca to her and to me; bhava iishvarii you be the ruling deity; 'To all of the choicest 
women appropriated by me... and to the one who is my present prime queen, namely Mandodari, to her and 
to me, and to all of us, you be the ruling deity...' Tiirtha.

Shlok 29: "Nestled on a mountaintop my great city known as Lanka is there in the midst of an ocean and all over 
encompassed by an ocean. [3-47-29]

Shlok 30: "Oh, Seetha, there you can saunter in pleasure-gardens along with me, and oh, lady with resentment, 
you will not think back to this forest-living, at all events. [3-47-30]

[Commentary] The word bhaamini is an addressing to a beautiful lady, who is with some anger or resentment
kopanaa saa eva bhaaminii - amara kosha and Ravana mistook Seetha's fury as 'an anger in passion.'

Shlok 31: "Oh, Seetha, if you become my wife five thousand handmaidens adorned with ornaments of every description 
will be in your attendance." Thus Ravana said to Seetha. [3-47-31]

[Commentary] Ravana, the devotee, is saying panca sahasraaNi daasyaH 'five thousand servants...' me 
'with me... together with me' paricariSyasi yadi tava 'if we all render service to you...' 
then you will be baaryaa; bha + aaryaa; bhaayaa= kaantyaa, aaryaa= puujyaa 'by your splendour...'
bhavasi you will become the venerable Goddess Lakshmi by your own splendour while thousands 
are serving you...'

Shlok 32: When Ravana said in this way, Seetha the daughter of Janaka, a flawless one by her physique, dishonoured 
and replied that demon. [3-47-32]

[Commentary] Here the word tu in raavaNena evam uktaa tu is said as tu shabdena puurvokta upacaara 
vacana vilakshaNa vacana it means ultimately as - Seetha spoke in derision.

Shlok 33: "I have avowed to adhere to such a husband Rama, who is inflexible like a sturdy mountain, comparable 
to lordly Indra, unshakable like a vast ocean. [3-47-33]

[Commentary] Vividly: 'A mountain will be unswerving even if a hundred thunderbolts strike it at once, thus is my 
husband... but you, you are always swerving while hankering after your petty cherishes... thus, you 
are a straw in the wind... my husband is a coequal of Indra, while you are humiliated by Indra's son. 
The ocean will be turbulent on its surface but it will be calm and clear at its abyss, engulfing unusual 
treasures... though my husband appears as a passionate person, an indulgent person in humanly pursuits, 
from hunting games to hollering, in worldly agonies and ecstasies, but at his heart, he is like the 
fathomless serene ocean... I have avowed to follow him in this lifetime.'

Shlok 34: "He who is enriched with all endowments, and who is like a banyan tree with its surmounted orbicularity, 
the high-minded one with truthfulness alone is his target, and I am avowed to adhere to such a Rama. 
[3-47-34]

[Commentary] The banyan tree is an Indian fig tree, Ficus benghalensis, the branches of which hang down and root 
themselves. The simile of a banyan tree to Rama says that: he is an atom in the atomic seed of that 
tree. On its growth, it spreads so wide and broad and every branch take its own root like the manifold 
growth of this universe. Hence, every individual being is his offspring and progeny. And the whole universe 
is pervaded by his 'tree-top' like shelter. Secondly, that tree gives shelter to innumerable beings 
for it is so wide at its apex. Hence, anyone can take shelter under Rama, because he is obliged to oblige 
all sarva jana anukuulata as said in an ancient saying: kuupa udakam vaTa cchaayaa yuvatiinaam stana 
dvayam | shiitaa kaale bhavet uShNam uShNa kaale bhavet shiitalam || 'water in a well, banyan tree 
shade, maiden's two breasts, will warm up in cold season and cool down in hot season...' Govindaraja.

Shlok 35: "He who is ambidextrous, broad-chested, supreme among men, and a lion-like person with the strides of 
prancing lion, and I am avowed to adhere to such a Rama. [3-47-35]

[Commentary] 'His dexterity is evident from the moment he started to save the order of universe, at the time churning 
Milky Ocean, becoming Mohini, becoming a Fish, a Tortoise etc. His strides are evident, when he as a 
dwarfish boy strode all the three worlds. As a lion-man, he tore the very stomach of the evil and now 
he is striding like a prancing lion towards you, for you alone are the prey for that lionised human 
incarnation...'

Shlok 36: "He who is a valiant one with a face like that of full-moon, a prince with his self-conquered, and he 
who is expressly acclaimed and effectively armed, and I am avowed to adhere to such a Rama. [3-47-36]

[Commentary] 'He is a valiant person and he confronts, if need be, his enemies straightforwardly, about which you 
have heard when your Khara, Dushana, and others are eliminated by him... but you are sneaky and slithery... 
you are ever a thief, never a valiant one... his face is like a pleasant full-moon, at any given opportunity, 
while yours is revulsive... and you are like the eclipsing planet Rahu or Ketu, whose effect lasts a 
few minutes... he is expressly acclaimed for his welfare activities and of course, you are also expressly 
acclaimed, but, only for your ill-faring actives... the senses of an yet to be crowned prince will be 
like the unbridled horses... but my husband conquered his own senses like an uncrowned sagacious emperor... 
while you, though you declare yourself as the monarch of demons, there is not even an iota of self-righteousness 
in you, befitting even to a petty king... then where is the question of your majesty, monarchy, or sovereignty...'

[Commentary] Seetha reiterates the statement 'I am avowed to adhere to such a Rama...' four times. This 
is daarDhyata - said for the purpose of 'reinforcement' of her statement.

Shlok 37: "You being a fox you woo me who am an absolutely inaccessible lioness? Why wooing, it is impossible 
for you to touch me as with the untouchable Shine of the Sun. [3-47-37]

[Commentary] A fox usually waits in a ditch until the lion or lioness finishes its feast. The lion will have its 
lion's share and go away. Then the lioness and her cubs have their share and go away. Then it is the 
day of the fox-in-the-ditch. 'Like a fox-in-the-ditch, how you dare to come to an inaccessible lioness, 
when the lion departed...' Next, Sun's wife is Prabha or Shine and she is non-figural resplendent entity. 
She is perceivable but untouchable. If anyone can lay his hands on her by the dint of his yogic or ascetic 
practises, and if he baskets that Shine for use in night, that night becomes a day, for it will be shining 
with sunshine, and thus his pleasurable night is evanished. Thereby he looses his minimal personal comfort 
of a night and it will be self-ruinous to experiment with such ideas.

Shlok 38: "You who are an ill-fated demon, oh, demon, by your wooing the dear wife of Raghava, thus you must be 
visualising many golden trees, undeniably. [3-47-38]

[Commentary] A dying person fantasises golden trees and the like presuming his travel to heaven. By these illusions 
his death is predictable.

Shlok 39: "Do you wish to twitch fangs from the mouth of a ravenous lion, the expeditious challenger of animals, 
and from the mouth of a rebounding venomous serpent. [3-47-39]

[Commentary] The simile of lion and serpent is to Rama and the fangs to Seetha. A lion or a snake knows well how 
to protect its instruments, namely fangs. Hence, Seetha is the fang of expeditious and ravenous Rama 
in eliminating evil on earth and now he will become a grudging venomous cobra too, for its tail is going 
to be trampled, by Seetha's abduction. Thus, the instrumentality of Seetha is established and no instrument 
needs to bother on its own, because its owner takes care of that instrument.

Shlok 40: "Do you wish to steal away the massive Mandara Mountain by the sleight of your hand, but how do you 
wish to decamp healthily without consuming lethal poison? [3-47-40]

[Commentary] She is reminiscing her emergence. Mt. Mandara is mentioned but not Mt. Himalayas or Mt. Meru, even 
though they are more massive and lofty. Vishnu used Mt. Mandara as a churn-staff when Milk Ocean was 
churned, but not Himalayas or Meru and the burden of that Mt. Mandara was sustained by Vishnu alone 
as a Tortoise, which is impossible for simpletons like Ravana, as Ravana failed to lift Mt. Kailash. 
Before Lakshmi's emergence from the churning Milk Ocean, Her elder sister haalaahala 
'lethal poison' emerged and it could be contained only by Shiva, and now, if Ravana contemplates to 
consume her elder sister kaalakuuTa, haalaahala 'lethal poison' it is evident what will 
become of him. This is nidarshana alankaara; samaanya vaakyaartha aikyata 'aesthetics of 
correspondence...'

Shlok 41: "If you wish to override the dear wife of Raghava, then it is as good as wishing to deeply scrape your 
eyes with needlepoint, and licking the razorblade with your tongue. [3-47-41]

Shlok 42- 43a: "You who wish to bitterly intimidate the dear wife of Rama are as good as the one who wish to swim an 
ocean arraying a boulder around his neck, and with a pair of hands you wish to steal away both the Sun 
and Moon? [3-47-42, 43a]

Shlok 43b- 44a: "You who wish to abduct me with an auspicious legend as the wife of Rama, thus you wish to steal away 
a glowing fire in a cloth-bundle, though evincing it to be highly flaming? [3-47-43b, 44a]

Shlok 44b: "You who wish to override the befitting and selfsame wife of Rama, are wishing to tread on the needle-sharp 
spikes of iron spears. [3-47-44b, c]

[Commentary] This declaration that she is selfsame to Rama is on the analogy of raamaa the feminal name of Rama.
aham naaraayanii 
naama saa sattaa vaiShNavii paraa - lakShmii tantra 3-1 - yahaa mayaa jagat vyaaptam svaruupeNa svabhaavataH 
| tayaa vaaptam idam vishvam niyantrii ca tathaa iishvarii || 'I am indeed Naaraayanee 
[i.e. Lakshmi] the supreme essence of Lord Vishnu----Lakshmi Tantra 3.1. 'In my essence and entity I 
pervade all this universe, and as I pervade all over I am the controller and presiding deity...'

Shlok 45: "Which odds are there between a lion and a fox in a given forest, which odds are there between a turbid-rivulet 
and an ocean, and which odds are there between a fine-wine and sour-gruel, likewise you are also at 
odds with the son of Dasharatha. [3-47-45]

[Commentary] The usage of the word syandanika is said to be the usage of a rare word by
Valmiki, meaning kshudra nadi 'a turbid-rivulet...' as recorded by Pt. Satya Vrat, in
Ramayana - A Linguistic Study.

Shlok 46: "Which imparity is there among the metals of gold and lead, which imparity is there among the waters 
of sandalwood and sewage, which imparity is there between an elephant and a wildcat of forests, such 
an imparity exists between you and the son of Dasharatha. [3-47-46]

Shlok 47: "Which dissimilarity obtains betwixt a crow and an eagle, which dissimilarity obtains betwixt a waterfowl 
and a peacock, which dissimilarity obtains betwixt a swan and a falcon living in forest, such a dissimilarity 
obtains betwixt you and the son of Dasharatha. [3-47-47]

Shlok 48: "Even if you steal me away now, later when Indra similar Rama posits himself with his bow and arrows 
in hand on the battlefield, you cannot live on, and in the meanwhile you cannot digest me, as with a 
diamond swallowed along with a fly." Thus Seetha gave her vent to her disdainful feelings towards Ravana. 
[3-47-48]

[Commentary] Here, if a fly is accidentally swallowed along with pure ghee, it will be
vomited out for the nausea caused by that fly in the stomach. But diamond rends the stomach. The
word vajram is usually a diamond, and if a diamond is consumed, accidentally or wilfully,
it will tear off the intestines to death. Hence taking the Vedic saying vajro va aajyam
the word is generally translated as ghee.

Shlok 49: On speaking these sentences with high-strung words, with all her unsullied intentions to that highly 
sullied night-rambler Ravana, her fragile body trembled tormentedly as with a banana plant up-heaved 
by gust. [3-47-49]

[Commentary] She poured forth all of her feelings unbothered for consequences and when her haranguing is over, she 
felt certain uneasiness. This uneasiness is two fold. One is in accordance with humanly nature of a 
woman as she is staunch enough to not yield to any, and if anyone makes an untoward advance, she has 
a 'list' of suicide-programs, those that are narrated to Lakshmana in the previous chapter. Further, 
she is yet to know about Rama's welfare, which will be impossible if this demon carries her away now. 
On the other side, as a Divine Consort of Vishnu, her uneasiness is for her separation from Rama, but 
not from the fear of any molestation by Ravana, and as the expected hour has come, the expectancy for 
the prospective elimination of Ravana is making her to tremble, impetuously.

Shlok 50: On closely marking Seetha to be tremulous, he that Ravana whose impetus is Death similar, clearly informed 
her of his name, caste, competency, and capability as his purpose is to cause scare. [3-47-50]



SARGA 48
------------------------------

[Text] Ravana vaingloriously extols himself and tempts Seetha with all impossible comforts and luxuries, if 
she obliges him and comes to Lanka with him, leaving Rama. She curtly dismisses all his baiting and 
luring.

Shlok 1: When Seetha spoke thus Ravana is embittered, and knitting his eyebrows he indeed spoke these rudish 
words to Seetha. [3-48-1]

Shlok 2: "I am known as Ravana, oh, lady with superb complexion, let safety betide you, the highly valorous and 
ten-headed stepbrother of Kubera. [3-48-2]

Shlok 3: "I am that Ravana at whose sight all the gods together with gandharva-s, evil-spirits, birds and snakes 
will always be frightened and fleeing, as with the people frightened and fleeing from death. [3-48-3]

Shlok 4: "I am that Ravana who when infuriated for some other reason took up a duel with Kubera, his brother 
from stepparent, wherein that Kubera is set up against and completely trounced in a combat. [3-48-4]

Shlok 5: "I am that Ravana by whom Kubera, the god for Wealth-Management whose vehicular transport is handled 
by humans, is tormented fearfully and made to completely abandon his wealthiest place which is presided 
over by him till then, and I am the one who made that Kubera to flee to the excellent Mt. Kailash where 
he is somehow living, because I will not cause any harm on Mt. Kailash as I hold it sacred. [3-48-5]

Shlok 6: "I am that Ravana, oh, auspicious lady, who just by his valour acquired Kubera's auspicious aircraft 
known as Pushpaka, whose pilotage is just by the wish of its aviator, with which I will be travelling 
in skies. [3-48-6]

Shlok 7: "Just by seeing rancour-shot face of mine, oh, Maithili, all the gods will quickly shoot off, even if 
Indra is leading them, then where is the question of their confronting me. [3-48-7]

Shlok 8: "Where I will be staying there the Air-god wafts doubtfully, lest his gusts and blasts may hurt me, 
and the Sun also effectuates his singeing sunbeams as cooling moonbeams, lest I may abduct his wife 
Prabha, the Sunshine. [3-48-8]

Shlok 9: "At places where I will be staying or freely moving there the leaves of trees will be less of rustle, 
lest I may wilt them up, and there the gush of water of rivers too will quieten, lest I may dry them 
up. [3-48-9]

Shlok 10: "My magnificent city known as Lanka is there on the other shore of the ocean, plethoric with all kinds 
of amenities, as well as with ghastly demons, which city will be on par with Indra's Amaravati, but 
for meekly gods and meaningless souls. [3-48-10]

Shlok 11: "That gorgeous city is completely walled in with compound walls that are adorned with whitish silver, 
and its palace-chambers are golden, and its archways are fully jewelled with lapis jewels. [3-48-11]

Shlok 12: "It is encumbered with elephants, horses and chariots, well sounded by the sounds of trumpets, and with 
trees which yield fruits that fulfil all the savours, and it is bedecked with chirrupy pleasure-gardens. 
[3-48-12]

Shlok 13: "Oh, princess, oh, self-respectful lady, if you reside there together with me, hÃ¨, Seetha, then you 
will not think of yourself as one from among human females. [3-48-13]

[Commentary] The addressing expression hè, has some significance, as in hè, raam... hè, prabho... hè, 
bhagavaan... This has a signal of reverence than that the usual 'O' or 'oh,' for they are bland 
expressions of addressing.

Shlok 14: "Revelling in humanly luxuries, over and beyond in heavenly luxuries also, you will not recollect humanly 
Rama, whose longevity is lessened. [3-48-14]

[Commentary] Vividly: 'you said that you enjoyed all humanly luxuries when you stayed at your in-law's place in 
Ayodhya, as at 3-47-4... they are nothing when compared with the luxuries I provide in Lanka... they 
are a + maanuSaan bhogaan 'super human luxuries...' as well as divyaan 
'paradisiacal...' so you choose yourself between this forlorn state and a stately living...' Ravana 
spoke this as a perfect tempting debauch.

[Commentary] Ravana as devotee of Lakshmi is saying: 'If you come to Lanka with me and tatra vasatii 
'while staying there...' another text for the above tatra vasa 'you stay there...' 
mayaa ' by me, a servant of yours, suchlike me...' ellipt. samarpitaan 'submitted, 
offered offerings...' maanuSaan ca divyaam ca bhogaan bhunjaanaa 'humanly, and heavenly 
luxuries, on enjoying...' maanuSiiNaam naariiNaam: dvitiiyena SaSTi 'one among human 
females...' na smariSyasi 'you do not reminisce...'

[Commentary] 'You will not count yourself as a human female, if you come over to Lanka and enjoy the humanly and 
heavenly luxuries, which I, as a humble servant of yours, will offer...'

[Commentary] If you come there, you will not think of maanuSasya 'incarnate as man, Rama...' gata 
aayuSasya = gata, aayuSaH = acquired, longevity; 'Rama who acquired a longevity for eleven 
thousand years... raamasya 'about such a Rama... you will not think about him at all...' 
ellipt. naH sambandhinaH 'we, the related beings of Rama...' smariSyasi 'you think 
of...'

[Commentary] 'you will stop thinking about humans and other humanly affairs, and you also will not think of Rama 
alone, but you will think about us, the accursed demons, the dependents and servants of the Supreme 
Person, Vishnu... and in doing so, your thinking shall lead towards our release from this accursed 
demon-hood...' Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 15: "Though Rama is the eldest son, king Dasharatha established his dear son Bharata as king, and because 
Rama is spineless he is put to flight to forests, and now, what is he and what am I, in matter of sovereignty. 
[3-48-15]

[Commentary] Ravana as devotee says: raaj~naa 'one that rules from within...' like an antaryaami,
'an inner force... i.e., you as Goddess Lakshmi, raaj~naa 'by King Dasharatha...' as 
an inner force of Dasharatha, you made Dasharatha to select manda viiryaH, a priyaH, putram, 
bharatam 'spineless, not, the choicest, son, Bharata...' and sthaapayitvaa 'you made 
Dasharatha to establish Bharata on throne...' raaj~naa 'by the inner ruler, inner force... 
by you...' the King Dasharatha is incited to send his jyeSTaH 'eldest son...' also as said 
in vishNu sahasra naamaavali: jyeSTaH shreSTaH prajaapatiH 'eldest, best, ruler of 
people... Vishnu, is prasthaapito vanam 'sent away to forests...

[Commentary] âyou are Goddess Lakshmi, an inner-ruler in all beings... though Dasharatha was uninterested to 
select Bharata you made Dasharatha, as his inner force, to select a spineless Bharata, and Bharata 
is established on the throne by Dasharatha, through you... besides, though Dasharatha was 
disinterested to send his dear eldest son Rama to forests, you as Dasharathaâs inner force, made 
Dasharatha to send Rama, the eldest, best, and the only ruler of people, namely Rama, [as said in 
Vishnuâs Thousand names,] to forests for the elimination of demons, and thereby to release us from 
our accursed being... hence you, as inner force of everybody, have to come with me, if Ramaâs 
incarnation is to yield its results...â Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 16: "Rama is subverted from kingdom, thus dwindled is valour, thus winded down is his anima, thus he has 
become a pitiable one, thus he became an ascetic as nothing else is there for him to undertake, oh, 
broad-eyed lady, what do you aspire to do with such a Rama? [3-48-16]

[Commentary] When a tempter can convincingly prove that a woman's husband is 'unfit' then only he can succeed in 
his overtures. His theorematic reasoning is to let down Rama from Seetha's viewpoint, as she has 
broad-eyes, and she is supposed to see reality: 'Rama is rendered to nothing as said in an age-old 
saying bhagnaa kR^iSe bhaagavataa bhavanti 'when manly pursuits fail, he turns out as a 
sanctimonious person... sanyaasi, bairaag, a friar...' Hence, living with him here will 
cause only eye-soar in looking at these murky forests, to your wide-eyes... thus, come with me...'

[Commentary] Ravana as devotee says: bhaSTa raajyena; bhraSTam ariiNaam raajyam, yena tena 'subverted, 
enemies', kingdoms, by whom, by him...' 'he who has subverted all the kingdoms of enemies, with such 
a Rama...' gata cetasaa 'devoid of inner soul...' He by himself is the Cosmic Soul and no 
duality of souls occurs in the Absolute Soul. Because He has no duality, there will be no duality in 
his acts na tasya kaaryam, kaaraNam na vidyate... shruti. Then He is taapasena 
tapasvinaam: taapasa ina tapasvinaam 'for ascetics, lord, also an acetic...' because He is lord 
of all ascetics he must also be one with them...' saha raameNa tvam 'with, Rama, you...' 
ellipt. ayam vij~naapanam 'this supplication...' kariSyasi kim 'will you make 
over, isn't it?

[Commentary] 'He who has snubbed down all enemy kingdoms, where enemies are not earthly enemies, and as he has no 
duality in his deeds, won't you make over this request of mine, in welcoming you to Lanka, to 
him...' Tiirtha.

Shlok 17: "I, the king of all the demons, am hit by the arrows of Love-god and came to you in love, and instead 
of beseeching me to love you, your rejection and speaking this way, is unapt of you.



"Although I am the king of all the demons, on seeing you I am hit by the arrows of Love-god and came 
to you, thus you love me... but rejecting me this way is unapt of you, as you alone will be loosing 
heavenly comforts, if you reject me. [3-48-17]

[Commentary] Ravana, the devotee is saying: 'I maybe the king of all the demons, but kaamaat 'longingly, 
devotedly, zealously...' iha aagatam 'to here, he who came...' manmadha shara aaviSTam 
prati here the last word prati 'towards' is to be taken as iva 'like, as 
though, deem...' then 'deeming me as though I am hit by the arrows of Love-god and talking 
nonsense...' svayam 'you personally... in your right mind' aakhyaatum na arhasi 
'to say so, is inapt of you...'

[Commentary] "I may be a king of all the demons in universes, but I am a zealotry devotee of yours... but deeming 
me to be one who is hit by the arrows of Love-god and thus speaking nonsense... this way of your 
thinking of me and speaking to me, is unapt of you in the right your mind...' Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 18: "Oh, modest lady, on refusing me you surely become remorseful like Uurvashi who once kicked Puruurava 
with her feet. [3-48-18]

[Commentary] Uurvashi is one among the four celestial chief maidens, apsara-s, namely, Uurvashi, Rambha, Menaka 
and Tiolottama. When Vishnu was in His meditation all the other apsara-s came to Him to disturb His 
meditation. Knowing that, Vishnu gave birth to this Uurvashi from his things. Thus, she is called 
the one who came from thighs uuruH 'from thighs...' and this word is defined as uru 
vaSTi 'muchly, splendorous one...' Then the other apsara-s had to accept ashamedly that 
Uurvashi is a beauty of higher order. Kalidasa took this as his subject for his drama 
'Vikramorvashiiyam.'

Shlok 19: "He that Rama is merely a human, and in war he equals me not by my finger, oh, richly colourful lady, 
and I chanced here merely by your serendipity, thus you honour me and my desire to possess you..." Thus 
Ravana spoke to Seetha. [3-48-19]

[Commentary] 'Serendipity' is the faculty of making happy and unexpected discoveries by accident... coined by 
Horace Walpole [1754] after The Three Princes of Serendip [now Sri Lanka,] a fairy tale. Now as a 
Lankan, let Ravana also say so.

[Commentary] Ravana, the devotee is saying: yuddhe 'in war...' yasya angulyaaH samaH ko api na asti
'whose, finger, equalling, whoever, even, not, there...' yaH saH raamaH ' who, he, is 
Rama... or, Vishnu Himself...' maanuSaH 'humanly incarnate...' tam 'him, such a 
Rama...' mama bhaagyena 'by my, fortune...' sampraaptam 'presently' let that Rama 
arrive [in Lanka...]' bhajasva 'him, that Rama, you hold him in honour...'

[Commentary] "In battlefield none can match that Rama even by his little finger, for He is none other than 
Vishnu, and such a Vishnu chanced here in the human incarnation as Rama, and let fortune betide me 
and let that Rama arrive in my Lanka, and you be instrumental to his arrival, then you may hold that 
Rama in high honour... for all this to happen first you come with me..." Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 20: Vaidehi who is spoken thus is infuriated on her part and with her eyes bloodshot spoke these bitter 
words to the king of demons in that lonely lace. [3-48-20]

[Commentary] The lonely place is an advantageous place for such tempters. But if the tempted is self-controlled, 
nothing adverse can happen. raagam viviktaa iti vardhayanti 'inclination increases in 
isolation...' But Seetha is disinclined to any such advances or lures or temptations. Some 
discussion is there in endnote.

Shlok 21: "How you wish to commit sins although saying that Kubera, a god reverenced by all of the gods, is your 
brother? [3-48-21]

Shlok 22: "All the demons will perforce get completely destroyed, oh, Ravana, for whom you the cruel and culpable 
one with uncontrolled senses is the king, and you will be blameworthy for the elimination of righteous 
demons like Vibheeshana, et al. [3-48-22]

Shlok 23: "It may be possible to live after abducting Shaci Devi, the wife of Indra, somehow and anyhow there 
will be no liveability after abducting me, the wife of Rama. [3-48-23]

Shlok 24: "Oh, demon, un-mirrored is the prettiness of prettyish Shaci Devi, and one may live long on forcibly 
snatching her away from the hands of the wielder of Thunderbolt, Indra, but to him who intimidates or 
abuses me or women like me, there will be no moksha, release from the cycle of rebirth, 
even if he has consumed amR^ita ambrosia." Thus Seetha spoke to Ravana. [3-48-24]

[Commentary] Seetha iterated twice about Shaci Devi for reinforcing her argument. She did not
say 'on abducting me you will not survive...' but said 'on abducting me, or women like me...' this
is to say that any husband devote-wife is not to be subjected to such humiliation. Further, this is
for ashliila nivaaraNa artham 'to avoid obscenity from the mouth of this principal
character in legend....' Govindaraja. As Seetha is unsure whether Ravana consumed ambrosia or not,
but, 'if your-like malicious minded beings, though they have gulped amR^ita 'ambrosia'
there is no moksha 'release, deliverance...' from death-birth cycle and that
moksha is possible through wise thinking... and, as your soul is full with foulness, that
unwise state of yours will never attain moksha...' Rama Tilaka Commentary.



SARGA 49
------------------------------

[Text] Seetha's abduction takes place now. Ravana forcefully abducts Seetha in his air-chariot. She bewails 
and bemoans for Rama and Lakshmana and appeals to all nature to inform Rama about this abduction. Finally, 
she sees Jatayu, the eagle, and asks him to narrate her abduction to Rama.

Shlok 1: On hearing Seetha's words that valorous ten-headed Ravana loudly clapped in dissent for once and divulged 
his very mighty body. [3-49-1]

[Commentary] These beings, including Hanuma, change into titanic form when they are infuriated. A cruel aspect minus 
anger is not in consonance with each. Thus, Ravana got wild first, but he does not want to hide his 
reality before his Goddess Lakshmi, hence he divulged his real aspect. Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 2: That wordsmith Ravana again spoke these words to Maithili, "Perhaps you have not heard about my valour 
and vanquishes in all your madness for Rama. [3-49-2]

[Commentary] Ravana as devotee is saying to Seetha: 'unheard are my valour and vanquishes na unmattayaa : matta 
janaat udgataa unmatta bhinna taa dR^ishayaa 'not mad... you are far from the maddened crowd, you 
are opposite of a mad personality...' na unmattayaa tvayaa na shrutau manye... 'though you 
are not a madcap in reality, you did not give any ear to my valour and vanity...' Maheshvara Tiirtha.

[Commentary] Once the demon Mahisha-asura was eliminated by Goddess Durga, a female, and Ravana is now talking to 
a female, [and maybe she is also in disguise like him.] If this woman assumes her real nature at the 
time of abduction, the abduction will not be easy and handy. Hence, before her assuming her real form, 
it is better to show his real entity. Thus, he clapped for once before changing into his real entity. 
Or, the role-play of a Brahman sanyasi is not in consonance with the villainous abduction and that garb 
of a Brahman itself is a hindrance to his original atrocious nature known to world as raa vaNa 'one 
who makes people to cry...' thus vexed with this role-paying of a Brahman, he clapped loudly and infuriately, 
for once. Rama Tilaka.

Shlok 3: "Standing on the sky I can lift up the earth with two of my arms, I can completely gulp down any ocean, 
standing in war I can even put the Death to death. [3-49-3]

Shlok 4: "Indeed, I can split the Sun and splinter the earth with my splitting arrows, oh, mad woman, I can assume 
any form as I wish, and endow any wish you wish, such as I am, I must be your husband, behold me." So 
said Ravana when revealing his real nature. [3-49-4]

Shlok 5: While the infuriated Ravana is saying in that way his eyes which by themselves are torchlit in their 
shine have became further bloodshot and blackened at their edges. [3-49-5]

Shlok 6: Immediately discarding the gentle form of a Brahman friar, that younger brother of Kubera, Ravana, assumed 
his own ferocious form which is similar to the form of Terminator. [3-49-6]

Shlok 7- 8a: That celebrated Ravana whose eyes are bloodshot as he is ensorcelled by desperate fury transmuted his 
form into a tend-faced, twenty-armed night-walker wearing golden ornaments of purified gold and appearing 
as a black tempestuous cloud. [3-49-7, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9: On discarding that guise of a Brahman friar that sovereign of demons Ravana educed his own physique 
and then that mighty bodied one attired in reddish clothing stood before Maithili observing that gem 
of a lady. [3-49-8b, 9]

[Commentary] He stood before her showing his mighty physique, expecting her to yield on seeing such a magnificent 
manly physique, which dissimilar to the girlish physique of her husband Rama.

Shlok 10: She whose tresses are glossily blackish until their ends, and who has on her glittering jewellery and 
silken-ochry-sari, whereby who is imperceivable like sun's glaring shine, to such Maithili Ravana spoke. 
[3-49-10]

Shlok 11: "If you wish to have a husband of well-renown in three worlds you seek shelter in me, oh, high-hipped 
lady, I alone will match up to you as husband. [3-49-11]

Shlok 12- 13a: "Ultimately you have a much-lauded husband in me, as such you oblige me, and I will not cause any displeasure 
to you at any point of time. Let your heart refrain from that humanly Rama and you start bringing round 
your heart towards me. [3-49-12, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14- 15a: "Oh, halfwitted lady, you who deem yourself a highly intellectual lady, listen, that mindless Rama who 
just by a word of a woman forebode kingdom along with all of his amiable people, and lives in this forest 
where the predators are on the prowl, thus he who is spurned off from kingdom, ungainful are his purposes, 
and who is even a short-lived human, I wonder by what merits you are impassioned for such a Rama?" Thus 
Ravana spoke to Seetha. [3-49-13b, 14, 15a]

[Commentary] For the verses from 11 to 14 Maheshvara Tiirtha, a very ancient commentator, tries hard to establish 
Ravana as an absolute devotee of Goddess Lakshmi, for Ravana himself was their doorkeeper in heaven 
before his accursed being. He is one from the two doorkeepers in vaikuNTha 'abode of Lord Vishnu 
and Lakshmi' called Jaya and Vijaya Ravana is Jaya, the doorkeeper. That commentary is like 
this. yadi aham patiH 'if, I am, the lord...' raakshasaam iti seSaH elliptic, 'of 
demons...' tava sadR^ishaH : kim bhR^itya - iti seSaH 'you befitting, elliptic, am I a befitting 
servant - no I am not...' 'Although I am not a good servant of yours, but if you wish to me be one,
triSu lokeSu vikhyaataam yathaa tathaa 'as if to become famous in all the three worlds...'
maam bhartaaram aashraya 'me, as servant, accept...' Here bharta is defined as 
shushruuSa aadinaa svaaminam bibharti iti bhartaa - bhR^itya iti arthaH 'one who serves his master 
by his services is bhartaa. Thus bhartaa does not only mean a husband but also a servant. 
Why should she accept Ravana now as a newly recruited servant? Because ciraaya tava shlaaghyaH
'for a long time I have been extolling you in vaikunTha as Jaya...' and I am a priya 
: priiNayati iti shshruuSa aadinaa svaaminam - iti priya bhR^ityaH 'a dear, earnest servant of 
yours...' maam bhajasva 'you know me thus as your humble servant...' maanuSe bhaava tyajataam
'humans only are to be saved..' - you leave this thinking and think that we the demons are also 
to be saved...' muuDhe paNDita maaninii mayi bhaava praNiiyataam 'Although I am an unread stupid, 
grace me too because I am your long serving servant...' Further, Rama is raajyaat cyutam 'not 
fallen from kingship, but he is a spurner of kingly pleasures, he thrusts these small things back with 
his foot...' why because a siddha artham - ashca asau siddha arthaH ca 'Vishnu is one with 
His purposes fulfilled... thus He does not care for a petty kingdom, when He is the King of Kings...'
parimita aayuSam : parigatam - tyaktam; mitam - alpam - aayuH yena tam - a parimita aayuSam 
'He is an eternal entity...' kaiH guNaiH - kaiH= anirvacaniiya; guNaiH= ananta kalyaaNa guNa shiila
'One with indefinable, illimitable auspicious merits...' anuraktaa asi 'you are impassioned 
for such a Vishnu, though... and I have no objection for that, but bless me too... durmati : duSTeSu 
api matiH - anugraahikaa buddhi 'He is not a mindless person, but he has a mind for the mindless 
and bad-minded persons like me... So please come with me and let your husband follow you to Lanka and 
accord salvation, as planned by you all...' Maheshvara Tiirtha.

Shlok 15b- 16: On saying that sentence to Maithili, who by herself is a nice talker and who is a proper one for addressing 
with nice words, that verily evil-minded demon Ravana maddened by lust drew nigh of Seetha and grabbed 
her, as Budha, the Jupiter grabs the Star Rohini in firmament. [3-49-15b, 16]

[Commentary] What happened to the lakshmaNa rekha? 'A boundary drawn by Lakshmana when he departed Seetha 
in search of Rama?' Some discussion about this is there in the endnote. Here, even though Ravana is
su duSTa aatmaa, kaama mohitaa 'a very wicked souled and lustily crazed....' it is all for 
other women, but not towards Seetha. And thus he caught hold of Seetha, as the planet Budha, Jupiter, 
the son of Moon catches his own Star mother Rohini, a dear wife the Moon, reverentially. Maheshvara 
Tiirtha. Later commentators rejected this saying that, if it were to be so, then Ravana has Oedipus 
complex.

Shlok 17: He that Ravana grabbed the lotus-eyed Seetha on lifting her up with his left hand at her plait of hair 
at nape, and with his right hand at her thighs. [3-49-17]

Shlok 18: On seeing him who grabbed Seetha, who has incisive fangs, mightily armed and who is shining forth like 
a mountain crest and similar to Death, the forest deities quickly fled away terrorised by his terrorism. 
[3-49-18]

Shlok 19: Then the miracle-air-chariot of Ravana which is miraculously designed to appear and disappear at the 
wish of its master, yoked with miraculous mules, and built with its golden wheels and parts, appeared 
afore Ravana braying noisily. [3-49-19]

Shlok 20: Then he whose voice is strident that Ravana lifted her up by her waist and got Vaidehi up on the air-chariot 
intimidating her with bitter words. [3-49-20]

Shlok 21: Agonised with anguish when gone into the captivity of Ravana, she that glorious Seetha wailed loudly 
for Rama saying 'oh, Rama,' which Rama has gone deep into the forest by then. [3-49-21]

Shlok 22: Ravana who is infatuated with lust picked her up, which lady is disinclined for any kind of sensuality 
and who is verily writhing like the wife of King Cobra, and then he surged skyward and flew off with 
her in his air-chariot. [3-49-22]

Shlok 23: While that lord of demons is abducting her in the skyway, Seetha became frenzied with bewildered faculties 
and then bawled stridently like a hysterical person. [3-49-23]

Shlok 24: "Haa, greatly dextrous Lakshmana... oh, rejoicer of your mentor... you are incognisant of me who am 
being abducted by this demon who is a dissembler. [3-49-24]

[Commentary] Seetha tongue-lashed this Lakshmana alone in the earlier chapters and him alone she is addressing now, 
that too firstly, before calling Rama, that too addressing as 'dextrous one...' Is she self-contradictory? 
Not so, 'Lakshmana is the one who can protect even the self-reliant Rama, then where is the question 
of his not protecting Seetha from any calamity?' is her reasoning. On the other hand, Lakshmana left 
the hermitage just now, so he must be within earshot, while Rama went into deep of the forest long back.

Shlok 25: "Oh, Raghava, you have relinquished your high-life, happiness, and riches for the sake of righteousness, 
and though you avowed to protect your observants, you are unobservant of me who am being abducted by 
the unrighteousness itself. [3-49-5]

Shlok 26: "Oh, enemy-inflamer Rama, I reckon that you are an absolute controller of uncontrollable beings, I wonder 
why you are not controlling this kind of sinner, Ravana, indeed?" This is how Seetha started her cry 
in wilderness. [3-49-26]

Shlok 27: "Indeed, the result for an evil act will not be apparent instantaneously. Even the time becomes a factor 
in the matter of cause and effect, as with the crops becoming cookable after certain time lag." Thus, 
she is addressing Ravana now. [3-49-27]

Shlok 28: "The Time has battered your brains and as an infringer you have undertaken this particular exploit, 
whereby you will get a devastating and life-ending tribulation from Rama." Thus, she upbraided Ravana. 
[3-49-28]

Shlok 29: "An honest wife of a glorious one who aspires nothing but honesty, such a wife of Rama as I am, I am 
being abducted, thus the aspiration of Kaikeyi and her kinfolk has now come true. Oh, god!" Thus, she 
soliloquised. [3-49-29]

[Commentary] Rama also talks in this way when Viraadha abducted Seetha in the opening chapter of this Aranya Kanda. 
This small talk is more humanly as said: supramatta kupitaanaam bhaava j~naanam dR^iSTam 'in 
the delirious or furious conditions, one's own heart is outspoken...' and if it is spoken in anger none 
but their antagonists are envisaged, firstly.

Shlok 30: "I call the attention of the flowered Karnikaara trees of Janasthaana, you inform Rama that Ravana is 
thieving Seetha." Thus, she is addressing the woods and others on the ground from air-chariot. [3-49-30]

Shlok 31: "I pray you who are with the bustle of swans and saarasa water birds, oh, River Godavari, you promptly 
tell Rama that Ravana is thieving Seetha. [3-49-31]

[Commentary] This does not mean that this request is as good as asking that river to overflow its banks to go to 
Rama and tell the news. It is: "I pray you to tell this news to any one of the bustling birds in your 
lap and that bird swiftly takes to flight to go to Rama and informs him, because the birds are also 
sympathetic with Rama and with me, as well...' This is hamsa sandesha, saarasa sandesha which 
idea became more famous at a later time for the emergence of masterpieces like megha sandesha 
of Kalidasa and hamsa sandesha in nala damayanti upaakhyaana.

Shlok 32: "I also venerate you, the sylvan deities that travel in this forest with diverse trees or, those that 
abide on the treetops, you may please inform my husband that I am being stolen. [3-49-32]

[Commentary] The word namaskaromi is of two parts: namaH, karomi and this namaH is again 
cleavable as na mama 'not, mine...' 'I have no 'I-ness' and I wholly submit my 'my-ness' unto 
you...' Thus namaH kaomi is 'I am making myself in submission to you...' and if this said with 
the gesture of adjoined palms called an~jali, which in Latin is iungo, iungere and 
if iun is read as an` and ng be read as j~na of Sanskrit, this
iungo is also an~jali as Latin has many Sanskrit words in it. Then this is called
namaskaara baaNa 'a salutation-arrow' more like a cupid's arrow to bring two together... not 
necessarily a male and a female, but any two or more, in veneration or friendship.

Shlok 33: "Or, over there, some few beings that are living over there on the ground below, I seek shelter of all 
the flocks of birds and hoards of animals, and I pray you to convey this news. [3-49-33]

[Commentary] Seetha firstly appealed to the trees frenziedly. But reasoning herself that the trees can tell only 
when Rama comes to them, for they cannot move, and then she appealed to River Godavari and her swans. 
Presuming that the water loving water birds may not penetrate the deep forest, and then she appealed 
the sylvan deities presiding on the treetops. Again presuming that these sylvan deities of forests may 
not be able to see through the thick of forest, she is now asking the animals and birds that usually 
move on the ground, to locate Rama. This entire criss-cross thinking has happened within split seconds.

Shlok 34: "Inform my husband about his dear and loftier wife than his lives, saying that, 'helpless Seetha is 
stolen by Ravana.' [3-49-34]

Shlok 35: "If that ambidextrous Rama comes to know about me, even if I am taken to heavens, or, even if I am impounded 
by Death, that great-mighty Rama brings me back, on aggressing against all of the gods in heaven, or, 
against Yama, the Death God." Thus, she appealed to one and all, but in vain. [3-49-35]

Shlok 36: She that wide-eyed Seetha who is highly anguished and bewailing with pitiable words then with a wide-eyed 
expectancy saw the eagle Jatayu perching on a tree. [3-49-36]

Shlok 37: She that well-waisted lady who has gone into the captivity of Ravana craned and stared at the eagle, 
and worsted by fear she shrieked squeakily with a stuttering voice that is walloped with anguish. [3-49-37]

Shlok 38: "Oh, fatherly Jatayu, see me, like an orphanized one I am pitiably abducted by this lord of demons with 
sinister deeds. [3-49-38]

Shlok 39: "It is impossible for you to forestall this merciless night-walker, for he is formidable, shining forth 
with cunning conquests, also thus this wicked minded one is with weaponry. [3-49-39]

Shlok 40: "Oh, Jatayu, everything about my abduction shall be narrated to Rama, or to Lakshmana, as it has happened 
in its entirety." Thus Seetha supplicated Jatayu. [3-49-40]

[Commentary] Nobility will not seek help selfishly; if help is sought that way, the seeker instantly becomes an ignoble, 
falling from the heights of personal nobility. Seetha may be an impetuous lady but if she talking to 
a noble elderly person or being, she talks judiciously in all her humbleness. Here she is not asking 
Jatayu to wage a war against Ravana to save her. She is asking Jatayu to convey the news of her abduction 
to Rama, because as an old eagle, as old as her father-in-law, Jatayu may not fight back this Ravana 
successfully. Besides, Ravana is with weaponry and a cunning warrior. Jatayu may be a powerful eagle, 
but if it comes to weapons and missiles, a natural being cannot withstand the artificial ammunition 
of war. Hence, visualising the danger in Jatayu's attempting any combat with Ravana, she is asking him 
to be the carrier of news, as all the trees, river and her birds, sylvan deities, and the other birds 
and animals are not heedful of her request, and this eagle alone is beheld, besides being an old acquaintance.

[Commentary] Whether Seetha is touched by Ravana or not - is a much debated issue by ancient commentators. When Ravana 
is carrying a curse on his head, that makes his head/heads to be splintered, if he lustfully touches 
any woman, against her will, it is questioned how his head is not splintered now, when touching Seetha. 
Maheshvara Tiirtha brings in skaanda puraaNa which says that: chaayaa graahitvam api asi 
sarva vidyaa vishaarade | kesha chaayaam paraamR^ishya jaanu chaayam tahaiva ca | gR^ihiitvaa jaanakiim 
hR^iShTo lankaam praayaa tathaa eva ca | 'Ravana being an expert in all branches of sciences, caught 
Janaki by the shadow of her head-hair and the shadow of thighs...' Maheshvara Tiirtha.

[Commentary] For this Rama Tilaka says yet another way of catching Seetha, as explained for the verse at 3-49-17:
muurdhajeSu kareNa : muudhaja iSu kareNa 'best ones, arrows, with hands...' 'with the hands 
that handle the best arrows... Seetha is caught...' vaama kareNa uurvo saH pari jagraaha here 
the word uuru which usually translates as 'thighs' is said as 'feet...' 'Ravana caught hold 
of her feet as the Planet Budha, the Jupiter caught the feet of his mother Star Rohini in early times; 
and now iks requesting his personal deity Goddess Lakshmi to come to Lanka. Rama Tilaka.

[Commentary] Catching Seetha while she is standing is not possible in both the ways as said above. She should be 
in a supine position on ground to handle her from under her thighs or at the nape of the neck. Her falling 
on ground is not explicitly said in these verses in Aranya. But Seetha says at verse 3-49-34, that 'in 
a state of helplessness, I am abducted...' This word vivasha, vi vashatvam is not only 'helplessness...' 
but also a state of 'swooning...' She repeats the same wording in Sundara Kanda and even in Yuddha Kanda 
II at verse 8 of 116 sarga, while replying Rama's accusation, in saying that yadi aham gaatra samsparsham 
gataa asmi vivashaa prabho 'when I was 'helpless' I was touched by Ravana... fault is not mine, 
gods alone have fouled it...' Thus, it is assumed that Seetha was in a short swoon when caught by Ravana. 
Then again, when she was rolling on ground in the same state Ravana lifts her up by her waist into his 
air-chariot.

[Commentary] All this discussion is to establish Seetha is an 'untouchable' for others, and for fear of a blemish 
to her paativratya 'husband-devotness...' which topic will be raised by no other than Rama, 
after war. The absolute devotees of Rama or Seetha hold Ravana's touching Seetha, as an intolerable 
act. Thus, to portray that Seetha is 'untouchable' there are many more legends woven around this topic.

[Commentary] One among it is lakshmaNa rekha 'Lakshmana's drawing a line around the hermitage, like a firewall...' 
When Seetha transgressed this firewall and came out of it to offer alms to Ravana, in Brahman sanyaasi's 
guise, she in her fear fell down on ground, as said in aadhyaatma raamaayaNa in the verse:
tato vidaarya dharaNiim nakhaiH uddhR^itya baahubhiH | tolayitvaa rathe kShiptaa yayau kShipram 
vihaayasaa || 'then [Ravana] cleaved the earth with his nails, uplifting that clod with his hands 
and with a balancing act put it in the air-chariot, and quickly went away in skyway...'

[Commentary] Another anthology says that Rama while going after the Golden Deer, hid the real Seetha and placed a
maayaa siitaa ' an illusory Seetha...' in the cottage. This deceptive Seetha is continued until 
her self-immolation after Great War. Real Seetha emerged out of the pyre instead of this Maya Seetha. 
Then it is questioned, whether the bemoaning and bewailing of Rama for Seetha, throughout the later 
part of the epic is to hoodwink the readers or so? It is then replied that this also is one among the 
many miraculous effects of Vishnu viSNu maaya All this culminates into the saying of Bhagavad 
Gita: vyavasaayaatmikaa buddhiH eka iha kuru nandana | bahu shakhaa hi anantaah ca buddhayo avyavasaayiNaam 
|| 2-41 'the object to determine is distinct singularly, and many and unending are those who say 
manifoldly with indistinct minds....'

[Commentary] Nothing happens by mere touching of Seetha, for she is a resolute lady to abide by her husband Rama. 
Valmiki is very clear in picturing her to be a stubborn and staunch husband-devote, and no more mythological 
bends are required to prove her chastity. She herself proved this with her agni pravesha ' 
self-immolation...' to all concerned. If Seetha acquired a blemish by mere touch, then Draupadi will 
be in a more pathetic state, since she is physically handled by Keecaka, that too when she is in her 
senses. The common feature in both the cases is, some other man 'touching their braids...' A woman's 
head hair cannot be touched by anybody in molestation. atra dashagriivo atyanta avamati ruupam kula 
kShaya karam kesha grahaNam svasya bhavitavya anuruupatayaa kR^itavaa | kesha grahaNasya - sabhaa nayana 
- paruSha bhaaShaNa - vastra apaharaNa - aadi apekShayaa - vadhopekShayaa ca atyanta avamati karatvam 
kula kShaya karatva ca bhaarate prati paaditam - dk 'Ravana is predestined for self-ruin, hence 
touched the braid of Seetha, and touching the braid of a lady, dragging her to king's court, roughly 
talking to her, undressing her, all these lead to the destruction of one's own clan, as demonstrated 
in Maha Bharata...' In vana parva of mahA bhaarata, when Draupadi goes on complaining that 
'I am dragged by my braid... I am dragged by my braid...' Krishna says to Draupadi: rudiShyanti 
striyo hi evam yeShaam kruddhaa asi bhaamini | satyam te pratijaanaaami raaj~naa raaj~nii bhaviShyasi 
|| 'you women always go on weeping for such tings... [having suffered in such a way,] I promise 
that you alone will become the empress...' So also, Seetha is instrumental for the elimination of evil, 
called Ravana together with all his clansmen. This is as pledged by Veadavati, an earlier incarnation 
of Goddess Lakshmi. As such, Seetha has to go to Lanka to attend that complete eradication, according 
to mythology.

[Commentary] Whether it is myth or real she is not all a frailty to yield up that easily nor a weak bodied one for 
an easy molestation. She travelled the length and breadth of the country barefooted, that too in impenetrable 
forests. These ladies of lore had their yogic faculties with which Gaandhaari, the mother Duryodhana, 
in Maha Bharata makes him a diamond-bodied one, excepting his thighs. Their words come true if they 
utter them with certain concentration. At the time of burning the tail of Hanuma in Sundara Kaanda Seetha 
says: siito bhava 'cool down...' 'Let the fire on the tail of that monkey be coolant to him...' 
and it happened accordingly. That burning tail burnt whole Lanka, except some places, without any scorching 
effect on Hanuma. Likewise she would have said at Ravana hato bhava 'dead, you are...' but 
she does not say so. Rama's pledge to saints and sages to eliminate evil on earth is to be fulfilled 
by Rama alone.

[Commentary] Leaving the untouchablness or otherwise of Seetha aside, since every negative act is to be solemnised, 
let us listen to the fruits of listening or reading of this episode, siitaa apaharaNa 'abduction 
of Seetha...' as it involves the elimination of evil on earth, Skanda Puraana says 'nothing 
inauspicious will happen to those best people who listen this episode of Seetha's abduction...'



SARGA 50
------------------------------

[Text] Jataayu confronts Ravana on hearing the wailing of Seetha. He boldly forestalls Ravana and his air-chariot 
in the sky itself, and as an elderly being he reviles Ravana from the viewpoint of righteousness befitting 
to kings, but of no avail. His dilemma is that he cannot take flight to Rama's place, nor he can forestall 
Ravana until Rama comes. Yet, he persists to affront Ravana.

Shlok 1: Jataayu who is slumbering away craned and stared on hearing the voicing of Seetha and then he saw Ravana 
and even Vaidehi. [3-50-1]

Shlok 2: That best bird majestic Jataayu with a very sharp beak and appearing like a mountain peak, then uttered 
these words of expediency still perching on a tree. [3-50-2]

Shlok 3- 4a: "Oh, brother, now it is inapt of you to undertake a deplorable deed. I am one of those who abide by 
perpetual probity and avowed to truthfulness. Such as I am, oh, Decahedral-demon Ravana, I am the mightiest 
king of eagles known by the name Jataayu. [3-50-3, 4a]

[Commentary] This self-assured statement of Jataayu is like this: aham puraaNe dharme sthitaH 'I abide by 
the sanaatana dharama, 'The Eternal Virtue...' 'belonging to the master and the servant...'
aham daashyaH, 'I am a humble servant of Supreme Soul...' aham satya samshrayaH, 'I 
am sheltered by the Everlasting Truth... that Everlasting Truth is made known in satyam j~naanam 
anantam brahma... and thus bhagavat ekopaaya niSTaH, 'I have a complete dedication unto 
god...' - 'I with my unwavering determination am subservient to Him alone, and such as I am, in my presence 
you cannot undertake a deplorable deed, deplorable to that Eternal Virtue or to three worlds...' On 
telling about himself, next he started to tell about his master. Govindaraja.

Shlok 4b- 5a: "Rama, the son of Dasharatha, is the master of all the world, one similar to Mahendra and Varuna, the 
Rain-god, and the one who is connected with the well-being of all the world. [3-50-4b, 5a]

[Commentary] The simile of Indra and Rain-god to Rama is to say that 'Rama is a bestower of rains and livelihood 
like Indra, the presiding deity of east, through the Rain-god, the presiding deity of west, unlike you 
who are a pilferer... and he is the preserver of all the worlds... so, you also get persevered by him, 
because he is also the lord of yours...' Govindaraja.

Shlok 5b- 6a: "Whom you desire to abduct now, that best lady is Seetha by her name, and this glorious one is the legitimate 
wife of that preserver of all the worlds, namely Rama. [3-50-5b, 6a]

Shlok 6b- 7a: "How a king adhering to probity can lay his hands on the wives of others? If it is a king's wife, oh, 
great-mighty Ravana, she is to be safeguarded particularly. [3-50-6b, 7a]

Shlok 7b- 8: "Reverse your filthy course, or fortuity, or mind form laying your hands on other's wives. A sagacious 
person does not undertake that deed by which others deplore him. As with the protection of one's own 
wife from somebody's laying hands on her, other person's wife is also to be protected in that way. [3-50-8 
[3-50-7b, 8]

[Commentary] If it is asked that a king's wife is a special entity to be protected, and then other's wives are less 
fortunate or what? Not so, it is said that the wife of a king is a motherly entity. Other's wives may 
become sisters or sister-in-laws etc., but a mother is a mother. The difference in dealing with a king's 
wife and with wife of a commoner is that of a difference between a sinner and a criminal. Either way 
unrighteous it is. The very basic concept of wooing others' wives itself, is both a crime and a sin.
'R^itaa upeyaat...' iti shaastraat - gamyaa sva bhaaryaa | anyaa bhaaryaa agamyaa iti- maadhava 
aacaarya - dk.

[Commentary] Here the word 'king' also denotes the god, as Manu uses the word 'raajaa' for Yama, the Terminator yamo 
vaivasvato raajaa yaH tava eSa hR^iodi sthitaa... For this, Ravana may refute saying, 'this Rama may 
be a god of yours... but not mine...' And for this it is countered in saying, devaanaam ca devataaanaam 
ca saamaanyam adhi daivam... 'there is no your god or my god, but god is one... to everyone...'

[Commentary] Jataayu is asking for a reversal of Ravana's mind or course, otherwise misfortune likely to happen to 
him. Further, being a king one shall never do a deplorable and unkingly act.
anena loka 
ninditam karma na kartavyam iti | tathaa ca vishNu puraaNe - parityajyet artha kaamo dharma piiDaa karau 
nR^ipa | dharmam api ashubhodarkam loka vikR^iShTam eva ca - dk

Shlok 9: "If the means to gain probity, or prosperities, or even pleasures are inconspicuous in scriptures, oh, 
the scion of Paulastya, then even the erudite scholars will conduct themselves following the king and 
his demeanour. [3-50-9]

[Commentary] There is another flex for the raajaanam anu as raajaanam anu as raajaanam iva 
'like king, like subjects...' shiSTaaH  'anyone who takes recourse to righteous behaviour...' Because the king shall possess an aptitude to 
go through the scriptures and ascertain what is right and what is wrong, then only his subjects will 
follow likewise. Even if the course of conduct is imperceptible in scriptures, a king shall decide the 
right way, and thus the subjects automatically follow him, in the same way... thus, 'being a king, yet 
behaving like a criminal and a sinner, is inapt of you...' so said Jataayu to Ravana. Maheshvara Tiirtha.

[Commentary] Ravana is the son of Vishravasa who again is the son of Pulastya, the brainchild of Brahma, who are 
all supposed to be the well-read scholars in all scriptures and sciences. Hence, Jataayu is addressing 
Ravana to remember his scholarship, which is in effrontery with his present behaviour. And the suggestion 
that 'protect wives of others persons as you protect your own wife...' is to say that 'if somebody from 
your subjects, on following your present path, gains access to your wife Mandodari, do you tolerate?'

Shlok 10: "A king is the best repository for probity, prosperities, and pleasures, and whether it is probity or 
felicity or even iniquity that will emerge from the fount called king. [3-50-10]

[Commentary] Other mms read raajaa dharmasya kaamasya... then 'the king is the root
cause for the prevalence of probity, felicity etc. anena prajaa raajaanam anusaranti iti
suucitam... dk 'subjects follow what a king does...'

Shlok 11: "Oh, prominent one among demons, deviltry and mercuriality are but natural for you demons, but how you 
have amassed affluence, as with an evildoer attaining an aircraft that puts him to flight to heaven.



"You by your nature are a devilish and mercurial personality though you have come from a decent lineage, 
how you have become an outranking demon among demons and how you could attain kingdom, which is to be 
ruled righteously, like an evildoer attaining a heaven-bound aircraft. [3-50-11]

Shlok 12: "He whose nature is such, that nature is perhaps impossible to efface, a sermon does not dwell in the 
heart of an evil-minded one for a long time, indeed.



"He whose nature itself is vile, it is perhaps impossible for him to efface it, and in the residence 
of such an evil-minded person, evilly acquired prosperity does not dwell for a long time, indeed. [3-50-12]

[Commentary] Ruling the kingdom righteously, in itself is a merit that leads that king to heavens. When the kingdom 
itself is acquired unrighteously, and so the oppulence, there is no question of merit or heaven, or 
even an air ticket to that heaven. For such persons, all these are ad hoc luxuries.
anena paapiShTasya 
aishvaryam na bhavati | praaptam cet api na tiShTati - adharmaat ca eva nahuShaH pratipede rasaatalam 
- kaamandaka - dk

[Commentary] The reference to an aircraft that carries Ravana to heaven is not the Pushpaka aircraft, which he already 
grabbed from Kubera. The airports of Pushpaka aircraft are in the mortal worlds and in heavens it can 
land at the best in Indra's heaven, say paradise. There is no entry for these petty airships into the 
higher realms of Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara if piloted by Ravana like demons.

Shlok 13: "When that great-mighty Rama has not transgressed either in your country or in your city Lanka, then 
how you become a transgressor in respect of that noble-souled Rama? [3-50-13]

[Commentary] Vividly: 'you may say that abduction of enemy's wife is my hobby... but you are abducting the wife of 
one who is neither a friend nor an enemy of yours... why for is this fancy when viewed in the prospective 
of righteousness or polity of kingships... anena anaparaadhiShu 
samiiciineShu aparaadho na kartavyam iti suucitam | tathaa ca udyoga parve - mahaa bhaarate - duryodhanam 
prati bhagavad vacanam - aatmaanam kR^intati hi eSha vanam parashunaa yathaa | yatsamyak vartamaaneShu 
mithyaa raajan pravartate || iti - dk 'No unilateral aggression is desirable at the unaggressive 
lot... Thus, Lord Krishna says to Duryodhana in Udyoga parva of Maha Bharata: broadly: 'a wood is felled 
by its own kin-wood, namely a wooden shaft attached to the axe... so, the present pseudo-kings will 
be felled down by their own kinsfolk...'

[Commentary] Jataayu's questioning is the same that was once Seetha asked Rama in the early chapters of Aranya, 'why 
wage a war without a cause...' She must have understood the answer by now by the acts of Ravana.

Shlok 14: "If Rama of indefatigable deeds firstly eliminated Khara who is stationed at Janasthaana, and who transgressed 
for the sake of Shuurpanakha, tell me what in actuality is the highly overstepping behaviour of Rama 
in that matter, whereupon you are stealing off with the wife of such a lord of world? [3-50-14, 15]

Shlok 16: "Instantly deliver up Vaidehi. Let not the disastrous and glowing fire-like eyes of Rama, which transmogrify 
so when he assumes fury, burn you down as the Thunderbolt of Indra once burnt the demon Vritta. [3-50-16]

Shlok 17: "You are unconscious that you have presently bundled a lethally venomous serpent at the fringe of your 
attire, and you are equally unwary that the Terminator's lasso is presently loosened around your neck. 
[3-50-17]

Shlok 18: "Oh, cultured one, that weight alone is to be shouldered by which a man is not brought down, and that 
repast alone is to be consumed by which nothing upsets. [3-50-18]

[Commentary] Futile is the experimentation with impossible undertakings as they will be upsetting normalcy. 
anena ashakyam 
karma na kartavyam iti suucitm | tathaa ca kaamandake - shakya ashakya paricchedam kuryaat budhyaa prasannatayaa 
| kevalam danta bha~Ngaaya dantinaH shaila taaDanam - iti - dk  'capability or incapability 
is to be assessed firstly, with a judicious mind... one's own teeth may not be hit with a stone, only 
to examine how easily they can be broken by that stone...'

Shlok 19: "Who will undertake a deed that yields neither probity, nor deference, nor distinction but results in 
just physical drudgery? [3-50-19]

[Commentary] The words kiirti, yashaas may look synonymous but have been defined separately. kiirti 
is the fame which arises from acts of valour, etc., while yashas is the fame which arises from 
acts of charity and the like. In another way kiirti is the renown obtained from doing merited 
and socio-economic deeds done through conducting Vedic rituals and the like, and yashas is 
the renown obtained from having riches, wealth, and affluence. Rama Tilaka says that kiirti = deshaantara 
khyaati fame which 'spreads in countries beyond one's own country...' while yashas = sva desha 
khyaaati is 'the fame confined to one's own country.' Dr. Satya Vrat is of the opinion that 'which 
of the two explanations of the commentator, Rama Tilaka, is acceptable and more reasonable we cannot 
say in our present stage of knowledge... In fact the commentator himself is not sure; one strikes him 
at one time, and another at another place...' Kulluka Bhatt in his commentary on manu dharma shaastra 
says that jiivataH khyati ruupam - yashaH 'fame in living time is yashaH and the other
mR^itasya khyaati ruupam - kiirtim 'the fame that remains after death is kiirti

[Commentary] Fruitless, wearisome undertakings are meaningless thus they need not be undertaken.
ananena niShphalam 
aayaasakaram karma na aarambhaNiiyam iti suucitam | tathaa ca manuH - na karma niShphalam kuryaat yasmaat 
asukhodayam - dk

Shlok 20: "I have dedicated myself to the kingdom of my fathers and forefathers according to tradition, and sixty 
thousand years have elapsed since I was born. [3-50-20]

Shlok 21: "You are youngish whereas I am oldish, you are an armoured archer darting arrows from an air-chariot, 
whereas I am pensile bird in an open sky. Nevertheless, on taking Vaidehi you cannot abscond safely. 
[3-50-21]

Shlok 22: "It will be incapable of you to forcibly abduct Vaidehi when I keep an eye one her, as with the defilement 
of definitive Vedic scriptures by the logicians, dialecticians, materialists and suchlike non-believers, 
with their conjectural logic.



"Veda-s are definitive in their canons and their authority is established beyond doubt, yet the doubtful 
scholarly logicians still try to pamper their import with their conjectural logic, and when I am watchful 
of what is going on I do not let you pamper Seetha, as such take this caution and release her. [3-50-22]

[Commentary] The Indian materialists called caarkavaa-s, or, the nihilists like Sage Jaabaali, 
who tries to preach nihilism to Rama, and the non-conformists to Veda-s, called a-Vaidika-s 
like Buddhists and Jain-s etc., try hard to let down what Veda says, with all their masterly 
dialectics. Even then, at one stage or 
the other, they all yield up, or a stalemate, or a faux pas occurs in their debates. Thus, no scholar 
need abuse the scriptures, for he does not know the subject in its entirety, or what those scriptures 
contain. anena shruti 
pratipanno artho na aabhaasaiH tarkaiH baadhayitum shakyata iti suucitam | tathaa ca manuH - yo avamanyeta 
te tuubhe hetu shaastra aashrayaat naraH | sa saadhubhiH bahiShkaaryo naastiko veda nindakaH || - dk

[Commentary] This Seetha is compared with Veda-s, one to many times, for the reason of her sacredness as a devout 
husband-devotee. Sugreeva also says this alone at 4-6-5: 'for I will fetch her very soon, like the retrieval 
of Scriptures of Veda-s...

[Commentary] Basing on these references of Seetha to Vedic canons, there is a thinking that the subject of Ramayana 
is the problem of god in retrieving the lost word, where that word was with the god at the beginning. 
Seetha is Veda, the word, Gayatri etc. And god has lost it. In search of that word, Veda, Gayatri, the 
god started his search. In his search he helps all those who abide by 'word' or 'faithful to word' and 
ultimately annihilates the demons that falsify or abuse the 'word.'

Shlok 23: "Stay for a moment, oh, Ravana, if you are valiant enough you can combat with Rama who will return right 
away, and at his hand you will be slain and sprawling on earth in the same way as Khara sprawled earlier. 
[3-50-23]

[Commentary] Or optionally, you can combat with me in which meantime Rama will come hither...

Shlok 24: "He who eliminated demons and ogres in combats time after time, that Rama though apparently attired 
in jute-cloths like a meek-saint, will become a towering-inferno in a given combat, and he eliminates 
you very soon. [3-50-24]

Shlok 25: "What can possibly be done by me when those princes have gone far-off! It is beyond the scope of my 
fetching them in time! You knave, you who are scared of them will now be lost to my blockade, without 
a doubt. [3-50-25]

Shlok 26: "When I am alive you cannot lead away this auspicious, lotus-leave-eyed Seetha, the dear queen of Rama. 
[3-50-26]

Shlok 27: "But I must definitely accomplish something to forestall you till they come, for I cannot willingly 
depart from here to fetch any of the two brothers, and that deed I needs must do shall be agreeable 
to the great-souled Rama, likewise even to Dasharatha, even at the stake of my life. [3-50-27]

Shlok 28: "Stopoff! Stopoff! Oh, Decahedral Ravana, briefly learn of me as how I jettison you from your best air-chariot, 
as with the unloading of a burdensome fruit from its sepals. Oh, nightwalker, I will be giving guestship 
to you in a duel as long as I am alive. [3-50-28]



SARGA 51
------------------------------

[Text] The combat of Jataayu and Ravana ensues now, as Ravana was adamantine to the righteous sermons of Jataayu. 
In combating with Ravana, Jataayu shatters Ravana's bows, arrows, and chariot and kills the mules of 
the chariot and plucks off the head of the charioteer with his beak. Further Jataayu attacks on the 
body of Ravana lacerating severally. Enraged at the bird-hits Ravana severs that eagle's wings, feet, 
and sides. Then seeing that fallen eagle Seetha weeps over, as if Jataayu is her own relative.

Shlok 1: When Ravana is spoken to by Jataayu with judicious words, Ravana's eyes reddened infuriately, and his 
burnished golden ear-knobs flickered injuriously, and that lord of demons dashed towards the lord of 
birds, intolerantly. [3-51-1]

[Commentary] Ravana's ear-knobs jerked flickeringly, as if they are fireballsas, when he gnashed his teeth in anger. Here 
another type of rendering for this verse is available in other versions, which reads: iti uktasya 
yathaa nyaayam raavaNasya jaTaayuShaa | kruddhasya agni nibhaaH sarvaa rejuH vimshati dR^iShTayaH ||'thus 
when Jataayu spoke to Ravana in judicious words, all the twenty eyes of infuriated Ravana are torched, 
like torchlit fires...'

Shlok 2: As with two gigantic clouds up-heaved by the tornadic gusts will be hard hitting each other tempestuously 
in sky, the combat between those two, Ravana and Jataayu, became tempestuous in the sky. [3-51-2]

Shlok 3: As with a startling combat between two gigantic and winged mountains, called Mt. Maalyavanta-s, that 
combat between the eagle and demon then became a startling one. [3-51-3]

[Commentary] One commentator said that one Mt. Maalyavanta is in Dandaka forest and the other in Kishkindha, while 
another commentator said that one is in Dandaka forests and the other is nearby Mt. Meru. There appears 
to be no second Mt. Maalyavanta and the poet seems to be taking one mountain and mirroring it, and thus 
saying that if two selfsame mountains were to confront, then it will be disastrous. This is to narrate 
the equivalence between their courage and strength.

Shlok 4: Then the great-mighty Ravana incessantly stormed the lord of eagles Jataayu, with arrows that have excruciating 
and highly dreadful arrowheads, like tubular arrows, iron arrows, and with arrows that have crescentic 
arrowheads. [3-51-4]

Shlok 5: That eagle Jataayu who is the lord of winged-chariots, namely birds, in turn sustained those arrays 
of Ravana's arrows in that combat. [3-51-5]

Shlok 6: But that great-mighty Jataayu severally made gashes on the body of Ravana with his two feet that have 
gashing claws for that bird is with best stamina. [3-51-6]

Shlok 7: Now the Decahedral demon Ravana infuriately took up ten deadly arrows that are similar in their shine 
to the Shafts of the Terminator, wishful of the elimination of his enemy. [3-51-7]

Shlok 8: That highly energetic Ravana released and impaled the eagle with straight shooting arrows on fully stretching 
the bowstring up to his ear, whose steel-pointed arrowheads are sharp, hurtful, and deadly. [3-51-8]

Shlok 9: That Jataayu on seeing teary-eyed Jaanaki in the chariot of the demon forcefully lunged towards that 
demon heedless of arrows that are lunging at him. [3-51-9]

Shlok 10: That unexcelled bird of high refulgence then shattered Ravana's bow which is decorated with pearls and 
gemstones, and on which an arrow is admitted targeting the eagle, just by the pair of his bare feet. 
[3-51-10]

Shlok 11: Ravana convulsed in anger then took up another bow and stormed hundreds and thousands of arrow storms. 
[3-51-11]

Shlok 12: Nested in the arrows shot by Ravana that lordly bird Jataayu then shone forth in that combat like a 
bird that obtains a readymade nest. [3-51-12]

Shlok 13: On winnowing those arrays of arrows with both of his wings, he that highly refulgent Jataayu shattered 
the mighty bow of Ravana with both of his feet. [3-51-13]

Shlok 14: That highly resplendent lord of birds also blasted off the armour of Ravana, which is glowing and flamelike 
in its flare, with both of his feet. [3-51-14]

[Commentary] The word used here for armour is sharaavara and for this Pt. Satya Vrat says: 'Another word 
which is also not noticed by Monier Williams is sharaavara. It means an armour kavaca
and occurs at least twice in the Ramayana...' i.e., here and at 3-64-49 of this canto.

Shlok 15: Mighty Jataayu also knocked off the ghost-faced mules yoked to the chariot of Ravana which are covered 
in golden armours and tantivy in fastness. [3-51-15]

Shlok 16: Then that great-chariot which is flourishing with three bamboos from chassis to yoke, and which traverses 
just by its steersman's wish, and which is crafted fantastically with gem-studded body and stairs, or, 
whose wheels are crafted with gold and gemstones, and which in its flare is like a Ritual-fire, Jataayu 
splintered down even that chariot of Ravana. [3-51-16]

Shlok 17: Jataayu swiftly collapsed the parasol of Ravana which in shine is mirroring the full moon, along with 
the regalia of white-royal-fur-fans, together with the demons handling them for fanning Ravana. [3-51-17]

Shlok 18: Again that highly energetic and imposing king of birds pecked off the robust head of the charioteer 
of Ravana with beak. [3-51-18]

Shlok 19: Now Ravana who is with his devastated bow, devoid of chariot, dispatched are his horses and departed 
is his charioteer, and such as he is, he on grabbing Vaidehi by her torso, or, placing her on the lower 
end of his torso, jumped to earth. [3-51-19]

[Commentary] Again the problem of 'untouchability of Seetha' occurred. Hence that compound ankena 
aadaaya vaidehiim 
can be expressed in two ways, one is like the usual villain's grabbing by torso, and the other is like 
an ardent devotee of Goddess Lakshmi, keeping her on his torso. This is similar to the method adopted 
by Viraadha while handling Seetha.

Shlok 20: On seeing Ravana who is foundered onto earth from his crumbled vehicle, all beings like sylvan deities, 
caarana-s, siddha-s and suchlike, reverenced that lordly eagle Jataayu. [3-51-20]

Shlok 21: But on seeing the commandant of birds Jataayu is fatigued owing to his senescence, Ravana is gladdened 
and he again rose up to skies taking Maithili. [3-51-21]

Shlok 22- 23: The highly resplendent king of eagles Jataayu swiftly rose to sky dashing practically to forestall Ravana, 
which demon's assault devices are all demolished by now save for a single sword, but who is cheerful 
to spirit away the daughter of Janaka, and actually spiriting away holding her onto his flank, and Jataayu 
spoke this to such Ravana. [3-51-22, 23]

Shlok 24: "You mean-minded Ravana, you abduct her whose husband wields arrows that touch off like the Thunderbolt 
of Indra, and this spite of yours is definitely for the destruction of all the demons. [3-51-24]

Shlok 25: "As one thirsteth drinketh water, you drinketh venomous drink along with your friends, relatives, ministers, 
armies, and with your accomplices, as this abduction of Seetha itself is squirrelling away dangerous 
poison. [3-51-25]

Shlok 26: "As with the mindless adventurers quickly getting ruination for they undertake self-ruinous exploits, 
unknowing the backlashes thereof, so also you too will ruin that quickly with this mindless adventure. 
[3-51-26]

Shlok 27: "You are tethered for termination with the lasso of the Terminator, as with a fish that can go nowhere 
on its biting fishhook with a piece of flesh. How do you untether yourself from that lasso of the Terminator, 
even if you go anywhere? [3-51-27]

[Commentary] Vividly: The Terminator gives a sinner a longest rope possible to hang himself from a tallest tree. 
Perchance there may be fish that bites the bait, stripping fishhook from fish line, dives deep down 
to escape from the fisherman, and yet it cannot survive even there, because the fishhook is already 
in its throat, which the fish can neither vomit nor swallow. Thus, it is destined to die. Likewise, 
you bit the baited hook called Seetha and running away with that bait and hook around your neck, thereby 
the Terminator has already lassoed His noose around your neck, and perchance you may presently abscond 
from this hermitage, but not from that noose, called Rama's arrow, for a long time.

Shlok 28: "But, oh Ravana, the unassailable Raghava-s of Kakutstha dynasty will nevermore condone your assailing 
this hermitage. [3-51-28]

Shlok 29: "Like a dastard you are committing a crime of thieving Seetha when none at home in the footsteps of 
thieves, this thieving is contemptible to society and condemnable by valiant ones. [3-51-29]

Shlok 23: "Stay for a moment, oh, Ravana, if you are valiant enough you can combat with Rama who will return right 
away, and at his hand you will be slain and sprawling on earth in the same way as Khara sprawled earlier. 
[3-50-23]

[Commentary] This verse is a repeat of verse at 3-50-23, and such iterations are not for want of paucity of verses 
or verbiage, but they are reckoned as the determination of the character to express his/her stance in 
similar terms.

Shlok 31: "A person undertakes such an unrighteous and fateful activity if only death looms large on him. You 
too have undertaken this unrighteous fateful activity only for your self-ruination. [3-51-31]

Shlok 32: "If sin is consequential to any given activity who will undertake it? Even if that person vies with 
the Self-Born God and Lord of the Universe, namely Brahma, will he undertake it?" Thus Jataayu advised 
Ravana. [3-51-32]

Shlok 33: Even on speaking those commonsensical words to Ravana, Jataayu found him carrying off Seetha heedlessly, 
then that valorous Jataayu descended on the hind-side of that Decahedral demon Ravana, devastatingly. 
[3-51-33]

Shlok 34: On clasping Ravana with incisive claws Jataayu lacerated deeply and rampantly, as a mahout, an elephant-trainer-controller, 
sitting astride on it will try to control an uncontrollable elephant that is running amok with an incisive 
goad. [3-51-34]

Shlok 35: Weaponed only with his claws, wings, and beak, Jataayu not only tore the back of Ravana asunder applying 
his beak and claws, but started to tweeze even his hair. [3-51-35]

Shlok 36: His lips becoming intolerantly quivery when Ravana is exasperated by that king of eagles repetitiously, 
that demon staggered on to his right targeting the hovering eagle at his hind-side to fell it down. 
[3-51-36]

Shlok 37: Ravana who is aggrieved and convulsed in fury hit back Jataayu with his palm while firmly clutching 
Vaidehi onto his left flank. [3-51-37]

Shlok 38: Jataayu, the lord of birds, being a vanquisher of enemies outstripped Ravana and ripped off ten left-arms 
of Ravana with his beak, with which left arms Ravana is clutching Vaidehi, in order to release her from 
his clutches. [3-51-38]

Shlok 39: Though his arms are mutilated thus, they instantaneously ricocheted from his body like snakes possessing 
a series of venomous blazes sprawling out from a snake pit. [3-51-39]

Shlok 40: The valorous Decahedron Ravana then threw off Seetha, and out of fury he scuffled with the king of eagles 
with fisticuffs and kicks, by both his feet and fists. [3-51-40]

Shlok 41: Then there chanced an encounter for some time between those two valorous ones with mutually outweighing 
capabilities, namely the chieftain of demons and the chief of the birds. [3-51-41]

Shlok 42: Ravana brandishing his sword at Jataayu, who is revolting for the sake of Rama, hewed off both of his 
wings, sides, and feet. [3-51-42]

Shlok 43: When that demon of cruel actions has ruptured his wings that colossal eagle Jataayu immediately fell 
down to earth with a lessened life. [3-51-43]

Shlok 44: On seeing Jataayu fallen on earth and dampened with blood Vaidehi fell into a fit of weeping and ran 
towards him as if he is her own relative. [3-51-44]

Shlok 45: Ravana, the monarch of Lanka, gazed at that worthily valorous Jataayu, who in his shine is like a blue-black 
cloud with a whitely white chest and who by now is like a quiescent fire-storm flattened onto ground. 
[3-51-45]

[Commentary] The cloudy blackness is simile to the black feathers of the eagle, and to the charred material by a 
wildfire. The whitely white colour is to the whitish feathers on the chest of the eagle, and to the 
white ashes overlaid on the charred material by wildfire, before they ashen. Thus, Jataayu fell down 
in a supine posture.

Shlok 46: But then Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, whose face vies with moonshine hugged eagle Jataayu, whom Ravana 
has subjugated with his forcefulness and felled down onto the surface of earth, and she wept over incessantly. 
[3-51-46]

[Commentary] Seetha is hugging Jataayu. 'Is it admissible or not...' is another debatable issue. 'Because it is bird, 
it may be handled...' is one adjustment, while the other is, 'when Jataayu is a personified entity and 
a friend of Dasharatha, this bird is as good as a man. So, Seetha's touching him shall be a taboo...' 
The commentators deal this aspect in the next chapter of this canto.

[Commentary] The character of Jataayu is not introduced just to give information 
to Rama at the time of his physical death. He is an example of self-duteous, self-dedicated, unpaid 
servant to his master. In Ch.14 of this Aranya canto when Jataayu firstly met Rama he says:
so aham 
vaasa sahaayaH te bhaviShyaami yadi icChasi | idam durgam hi kaantaaram mR^iga raakShasa sevitam siitaam 
ca taata rakShiShye tvayi yaate salakShmaNe ||"That is what I am, I will be your helpmate 
at your residence, should you wish so, for this forest is one that is impassable and adorned by predators 
and demons...oh boy, I wish to protect Seetha, if you go out of your residence with Lakshmana..." 3-14-34 
And Jataayu kept up his pledge in 'helping Rama and protecting Seetha' as much as he can, without hesitation. 
This selfless service and sermons he rendered to Ravana are exemplary. This is called
daasya bhakti 'devoutness through selfless service...' and service whether 
paid or unpaid is thus to be rendered selflessly - is the lesson he taught.

[Commentary] Secondly, birds hitting airplanes is not a recent phenomenon and 
it existed even before airplanes were invented, as is evident from Jataayu's hitting Ravana's aircraft. 
And Ravana's aircraft that is variously and amazingly portrayed by the sage-poet, is nothing before 
a bird. Hence, Ravana should have used some other latest state of art technology to prevent such bird-hits. 
This is to say, any artificial paraphernalia is nothing before a living organism, and Hanuma, a mere 
monkey, taking lessons from Jataayu, a mere eagle, reduces even the artificially devised Lanka to ashes.



SARGA 52
------------------------------

[Text] Seetha is abducted by Ravana. When they are on their way to Lanka the whole nature along with its inhabitants 
laments for the atrocious abduction of Seetha. In here, almost every verse is elaborated, for they contain 
poetic niceties, and hence more stuffing in introduction is unbefitting.

Shlok 1: Seetha whose visage is like a full moon wept on gazing the king of eagles Jataayu whom Ravana nearly 
killed. [3-52-1]

[Commentary] There occurs another verse before this one in Eastern recension which says that Ravana has firstly seen 
Jataayu who is spinning on earth to breath his last:
<>tam alpa 
jiivitam gR^idhram sphurantam raakSha adipa | dadarsha bhuumau patitam samipe raaghava aashramaat ||
thereby giving some time to Seetha to recollect what has happened.

Shlok 2: "Humans definitely perceive either agony or ecstasy by its concomitant happenings, or by the characteristics 
of uncommon reflexes of their own body parts, or by the presages, or by conjecturable concomitants, 
or by cognising calls of birds. [3-52-2]

[Commentary] Vividly: Seetha's plaint is like this: 'Oh, Rama, we humans do perceive good or bad happenings by the 
presages, like concomitant happenings of some hindrances when a deed is attempted, like unforeseen tidings 
like sneezing, a minor accident or a misfire, or unable to catch a sight of one's own face in a mirror... 
or by the undue reflexes of bodily parts, like flutter of eyelids or shudder of shoulders or arms... 
or by the callings of birds and movements of animals... so, by now your left shoulder and left eye should 
have shuddered, or some crows might have cawed uglily, or some birds might have gone from your right 
to left, except garuDa, bharadwaja  birds, and by these forebodings why do not you cognise that something 
is happening to me and thus why not come to my rescue?'

Shlok 3: "Oh, Rama, for sure you are not able to know about big catastrophe called my kidnap is chancing on you, 
even though oh, Kakutstha, these animals and birds are running towards you surely for my sake, to tell 
about me. [3-52-3]

[Commentary] bhaava/import: 'Oh, Rama you may not be able to perceive the prognostications as you are in a fit of 
hunting that Golden Deer, but, for a while keep that hunting at bay and give an ear to these birds and 
animals that are rushing towards you to convey the news of my kidnap... and for god's sake do not kill 
these animals, presuming that they are pestering you...

Shlok 4: "Oh, Rama, this sky flier Jataayu who mercifully came here to save me is verily mangled on his encountering 
Ravana, and he is sprawling on earth, indeed by my ill luck." Thus Seetha wailed. [3-52-4]

[Commentary] bhaava/import: 'My ill luck is so preponderant, in that it has demolished this Jataayu, who by himself 
is a pious and merited being who came to help the helpless one like me... but my ill luck pervaded over 
such an impeccable being also... otherwise Jataayu would have vanquished Ravana... thus, when an immeasurable 
ill luck is holding sway, it is for you, and you alone, oh, Rama, to come for my rescue...'

Shlok 5: That best lady who is very highly panicked bawled noisily, "oh, Rama of Kakutstha... oh, Lakshmana... 
liberate me now..." as though the addressees are before her. [3-52-5]

[Commentary] bhaava/import: A subject's bawling in the audience of a king is different from that of a cry of a subject 
in a moor. Here Seetha is visualising those two Kakutstha-s, Rama, and Lakshmana, right in her front, 
in a halo, and suppliantly bawling, as though asking them to come out that halo to help her out. Her 
bawling is not in a clamorous tone but it is a roshantiim madhura svaraam 'crying with mellowly voice...' 
as detailed at verse 42 below, for there should be difference between the braying of an ass and parroting 
of a parrot.

Shlok 6: That sovereign of demons, Ravana, rushed towards Vaidehi whose garlands and jewellery are muddled up 
and who is bawling like an orphanized one. [3-52-6]

Shlok 7- 8: Ravana, the lord of demons, has repeatedly and harshly taunted Seetha saying, 'leave it off, leave it 
off...' when Seetha devoid of Rama in that timberland is clinging and muffling a sturdy tree like a 
climber plant, and bawling, 'Rama, Rama,' and that demon whose shine is similar to the Death has clutched 
her hair loosened from her bun, as death loomed large on him. [3-52-7, 8]

[Commentary] bhaava/import: Here the word vane 'in timberland...' is actually 'loneliness...' plus, 'minus Rama...' 
and her crying is araNya rodana 'a cry in wilderness...' And from the viewpoint of Ravana, she is uttering 
a wild cry indicating that 'the giant tree called Ravana is going to fall...' as with the woodcutters' 
yelling 'timber... timber...' as a warning cry that a tree is about to fall, when the word 'timber' 
is used esp. as intransitive. This catching a chaste woman by her hair is the worst possible crime and 
sin as explained at 3-50-13 of this chapter. And now all the gods feel satisfied for the commencement 
of the process for elimination of vice on earth, called Ravana, though pitying Seetha.

[Commentary] Here, the 'capturing Seetha by her shadow' as explained by Maheshvara Tiirtha, is an untouched subject. 
If she can be captured by shadow while she is in her senses and agitating and clinging a sturdy tree, 
as with Simhika-Hanuma in Sundara Kanda, Ravana should not have given her this much time to bemoan, 
but should have captured by her shadow without leaving her to pay a visit to dying Jataayu. Hence, this 
capture is viewed on a human plane, rather than a conjuror's trick.

Shlok 9- 10a: While Vaidehi is insulted thus, entire world together with its mobile or sessile beings became chaotic, 
and there chanced a blanketing of a blinding blackness, and waft-less is the Wind and shine-less is 
the Sun. [3-52-9]

[Commentary] This 'blackness' is a poetic gloominess of the mood, rather than a material or mythical, or superimposing 
darkness. Sun is gloomy, wind is gloomy, and the entire nature is in oblivion of sadness.

Shlok 10b- 11: On seeing Seetha's appropriation by an inappropriate being with His clairvoyant eyes, the illustrious 
Grandparent of Universe Brahma declared, "the deed is done..." but all of the supreme sages in Brahma's 
abode on seeing Seetha in such a condition became despondent, and yet delighted in foreseeing results. 
[3-52-10b, 11a]

[Commentary] Usually this expression parama R^iSaya 'quintessential sages...' is linked with the words
danDakaraNya in next verse and said that 'the sages dwelling in Dandaka forest are delighted 
and yet, despondent...' If some elderly sages were available in the vicinity, they would have waited 
until the arrival of Rama and would have informed Rama of Seetha's abduction, though they may not be 
able to combat Ravana or hurl a curse at Ravana. But Ravana is no fool to abduct Seetha while a bystander 
stands over looking on the spectacle. Hence, these sages said here are those that are available in the 
academy of Brahma. And the danDaraNya vaasinaH in the next foot are the voiceless and incommunicable 
beings in Dandaka forest.

Shlok 12: On seeing Seetha's appropriation by an impropriate being, the dwellers in Dandaka forest cognised that 
Ravana's annihilation has chanced coincidentally. [3-52-12]

[Commentary] Again a poetic 'thinking' that even speechless beings can presage and prognosticate. Though they may 
not tell us directly, their body language and odd behaviour will certainly tell. The behaviour of animals 
and birds before an earthquake or a storm or any natural devastation is not an unknown phenomena. After 
all, a frog crocks before a rain.

Shlok 13: Ravana, the lord of demons, on wresting Seetha who is bawling, "Rama... Rama..." also thus as, "Lakshmana..." 
took flight skyward. [3-52-13]

Shlok 14: That princess Seetha scintillated like the oblique flashes of lightning in a cloud, owing to her golden 
coloured body which is muffled up with jewellery of pure gold, and added with a golden coloured ocherish 
silky dress, while traversing in the sky. [3-52-14]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: A lightening in a cloud does not last for a long period. So also, for being with this 
cloudlike Ravana, these flashes of lightning, called Seetha, will not last long, albeit those flashes 
alone will electrocute that cloud, called Ravana.

Shlok 15: When her ochreish silk sari's upper fringe is upheaved by air onto to Ravana, Ravana looked blazing 
like a mountain set ablaze, muchly and overly. [3-52-15]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: If some parts of a mountain are afire it is no problem since it is usual. But when 
the mountain itself is overly and muchly aflame, it is impracticable for any to prevent it or help it 
out. The upper cloth of Seetha's sari is goldenly silky and thus it will have a tinge of reddish brown 
hue, like the outer edge of the tongue of fire. That fringe pallu is upheaved, [intr.] rise and fall 
rhythmically or spasmodically, by air and it is flagging off the annihilation of Ravana, by its flag-like 
motions on his face. Thus, Ravana who is standing like a mountain as of now is destined soon to become 
a mountain with a self-ruinous fire, overly and muchly.

Shlok 16: Reddish and scented lotus-petals adorning that highly auspicious Seetha have slithered, but again upheaved 
by air they are bestrewn on Ravana. [3-52-16]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: The reddish lotus petals which hitherto are on her body, as garlands and on her braid 
as a chaplet, are crumpled and loosened in the tussle and thus each petal is falling each time. Instead 
of falling onto earth, they are upheaved and sprinkled on Ravana's body by the fast wind under the feet 
of Ravana, somewhat like a floral welcome. This is in one way a good omen to Ravana to get a release 
from his accursed state, while on the other, it suggests that his opulence is soon destined to wither 
away like a withered petal of lotus. The last foot is taken, which obtains in other mms, leaving off 
the middle foot, that also says the same.

Shlok 17: Upper fringe of Seetha's silk sari with golden glitter is upheaved in the sky, and with the reddish 
hue of sun in red heat of midday it beamed forth like a reddish cloud. [3-52-17]

[Commentary] bhaava/import: A reddish cloud is acceptable either in morning or in evening but not in midday since 
it is a bad omen.

Shlok 18: As with a stalk-less lotus the immaculate visage of Seetha is unbright in the sky when she is on the 
flank of Ravana as Rama is not in vicinage. [3-52-18]

[Commentary] bhaava/import: A lotus without a stalk looses its glamour as well as its infrastructure. As sun brightens 
the face of moon, Rama brightens Seetha's visage. As moon depends on sun, Seetha depends on Rama, and 
devoid of him, she is lost to the world for a glimpse.

Shlok 19- 20- 21: Her lotus pistil like un-pimply face is adorned with a pretty forehead on which prettyish curls are 
fluttering, and with teeth that are spick and span and sparkling, but tears dabbed on that face to sideways 
when she wept, yet it is pleasant like moon for a sight with shapely nose, pretty eyes, roseate lips, 
and shining with golden hue in sky. Nevertheless, when she has gone in the flank of Ravana on the sky 
such an immaculate face of Seetha turned like a palish moon that has just risen bursting a bluish cloud. 
[3-52-19, 20, 21]

Shlok 22: Highly disconcerted by the king of demons that auspicious face of Seetha is unbright like the moon arisen 
in daytime with somewhat golden hue, owing to the absence of Rama. [3-52-22]

[Commentary] bhaava/import: One moon is enough. If there were to be two moons, it is indicative of some havoc. Now, 
a silvern moon is there and this lady with her golden-moon face may supersede that silvern moon and 
thus may cause havocs. Moon coming out when sun is still on sky will be somewhat golden in hue. She 
is un-brightened because Rama is not at her side as of now, but like a diamond that is coexistent with 
coal, Seetha is now with this coal-like Ravana.

Shlok 23: She that golden coloured Maithili who is moored by the blackish-bodied sovereign of demons shone forth 
like a sapphirine gemstone studded in a golden cincture.



She that golden coloured Maithili who is moored by the blackish-bodied sovereign of demons shone 
forth like a golden cincture girded to an elephant. [3-52-23]

[Commentary] The gemstone sapphire, more precisely indra niila maNi, shines brilliantly when studded in 
silver ornaments, rather than in golden ones. Gold is no match to that blue stone. So also, Seetha's 
shine is dullish. This is vyatireka ukti alankaara 'a litotes...' The mms of Govindaraja 
says shushubhe kaa.ncanii kaa.ncii niilam maNim iva aashritaa 'shone like a sapphire with 
gold...' while Maheshvara Tiirtha puts it as gajam iva aashritaa 'a golden cincture like 
elephant's girdle, where Ravana is the elephant and golden cincture is Seetha...' Though this text 
of Tiirtha is found more emphatic, but the blemish of reiteration occurs to the epic, because 
another verse, namely 30 below, contains similar 'elephant-golden-cincture' expression gajam 
kakshyaa iva kaa.ncanii Then, in the text of Maheshvara Tiirtha this verse 30 is pushed to a 
farther place that is at 30. 'Then unblemished it is, insofar as proximate reiteration is 
concerned...' it is said so.

Shlok 24: Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, with a complexion that is goldenly yellowish in the tinge of a lotus, 
moreover with her ornaments of purified gold, flashed like a lightning possessed in a dark-cloud, when 
that stonehearted Ravana possessed her. [3-52-24]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: A lightning seeks no mercy. Though Seetha is overlain on the shoulder of that ghana 
saara hR^idaya 'stonehearted...' Ravana, she does not seek for his mercy to leave her off, as lightning 
overlain on a cloud does not seek the mercy of a ghanaa ghanaH 'a darkly massive cloud...' 
The nearness or the proximity of a lightning and cloud is short-lived, so is this proximity of Seetha 
with Ravana. And the lightning will brighten a darkish cloud, but the darkish cloud cannot darken that 
silvery lightning.

Shlok 25: With the rustles of Vaidehi's jewellery that lord of demons shone forth like a shipshape blue-black 
cloud with rumbles and undulating lightning. [3-52-25]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: A massive darkish cloud may rumble, roar or blare, but its bursting will be scanty 
and short. So also, this Ravana may appear like a thunderous cloud as of now, but it dissipates soon.

Shlok 26: Flowers gracing her best body on her head, in garlands on chest, and on armlets have fallen all-over 
the surface of earth like showers of flowers while she is being abducted. [3-52-26]

Shlok 27: Though that flower-shower has fallen all-over, it is windswept by the speed of Ravana, and fell again 
on that Decahedral demon. [3-52-27]

[Commentary] All the gods have caused the flower-shower, for their mission is going to fructify by this act of
siitaa apaharaNa 'Abduction of Seetha...' saying, 'Oh Goddess Lakshmi, you have graced all 
of us and the earth to allow yourself for abduction... thus triggered off is our mission of elimination 
of vice, in the shape of Ravana, on earth...' So said in kaTaka vyaakhya kaTaka's commentary. 
But Maheshvara Tiirtha says that 'when gods have no guts to affront Ravana or come into the sight of 
Ravana, wherefrom they cause a flower-shower? So, it is not gods that showered these flowers, but they 
are the flowers on her body fallen down by the gust caused by the speed of Ravana, but again windswept, 
up-heaved and fallen on the body of Ravana...' In either the case, Goddess Lakshmi has blessed Ravana 
with the flowers fallen from her physique onto the head of Ravana, as with the flowers slid from an 
idol in a temple, becoming worthy to wear on heads of devotees.

Shlok 28: Like the garland of pristine stars that circles round the loftiest Mt. Meru, that flower-shower circled 
Ravana, the brother of Kubera. [3-52-28]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: This whirling and twirling of flowers around Ravana is not a one time affair. It is 
continued by his dashing speed. When the circling flowers are lowered by gravity, they are again up-heaved 
by Ravana's speed and thus it is recurrent.

Shlok 29: Slid from the left foot of Vaidehi her anklet adorned with gems fell down onto the plane of earth like 
an electric annulus with its sparky sparkles. [3-52-29]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: This anklet has not suddenly fallen. It is whirling for sometime against the gust raised 
by Ravana's rush. When it is circuitously whirling, that ring's sparkles are like the sparks of electricity 
in a circular band. And this ringlet is a symbolic of an electric ring-like guard for the entire earth 
against further atrocities on earth, which is why it exhibited its electric-sparks in sky for a while 
and descended onto earth.

Shlok 30: She that Vaidehi who is so delicate like reddish leaflets of trees made that blackish bodied lord of 
demons, Ravana, well and truly lambent, herself becoming a golden girdle girded around the elephant 
like Ravana.



She that Vaidehi who is so delicate like reddish leaflets of trees made that blackish bodied lord of 
demons, Ravana, well and truly lambent, as with an elephant, with a golden girdle, stabled in an elephant-stable 
by a mahout, the elephant-trainer. [3-52-30]

[Commentary] bhaava/import: The first gist is the apparent and lexical in its meaning and the second one is like 
this: An elephant that runs amock and berserk will be controlled and brought back to normalcy by a mahout, 
an elephant-trainer. He will use all necessary items like ropes, chains, hurdles etc., to stop its haphazard 
running, and among them is a girdle rope with which he mounts that elephant with his goad to control 
it. Here Seetha is that golden girdle to this elephantine Ravana, with the help that rope Rama, the 
mahout, can control this elephant in rut, namely Ravana, and can place that pachyderm in its elephant-stable. 
Govindaraja.

Shlok 31: Ravana, the brother of Kubera, on invading the sky abducted that radiant Seetha who is radiating the 
sky by her own radiancy like a massive meteor. [3-52-31]

[Commentary] bhaava/import: The sighting of a meteor in itself is a bad omen mahaa utpaata suucitam 'augural of a 
great havoc...' and this Ravana is personally handling such a causer of a great havoc. A meteor, though 
visible as a streak of light falling in yonder sky, becomes incandescent as a result of friction with 
the earth's atmosphere. As such, it is tantamount to a massive fireball. Ravana is carrying this fireball 
to set his home afire. Perhaps Ravana might have thought in similar way and thus kept Seetha in Ashoka 
gardens, instead of placing her in his golden palace, so that his golden palace will not be burnt with 
this torch, called Seetha. But the same torch burns that golden palace down to ashes, though not directly 
but indirectly through Hanuma, in Sundara Kanda, as a coincidence.

Shlok 32: Some of her ornaments which are lustrously flamy, for they are sparkling like the sparkles of fireworks, 
are strewn about on the plane of earth with much clatter like the stars pelted down from the sky. [3-52-32]

Shlok 33: A multi-string pearl pendant, a riviï¿½re, that vies with the moonshine has glissaded from the medial 
of her breasts, and while glissading from sky it is sheeny like River Ganga while she glissaded from 
skies. [3-52-33]

[Commentary] bhaava/import: The simile upama of Seetha's pearly strings of a pendant to River Ganga may 
be observed and the portrayal of ganga avataraNa 'Ganga's descent to earth...' may be referred 
in Bala Kanda. The pearls of the pendant are shining like Ganga's glistening froth and foam, the strings 
are her streams, and the string's wavy movement is Ganga's beautiful flexuous and curvy drift, moreover 
the stings are falling off medially from two mountains, called Seetha's breasts, as Ganga also rose 
and fell from mountainous heights.

Shlok 34: The trees on which diverse birds are perching have been stirred up with the wind blown and up-heaved 
by the gust of Ravana's flight, while the swaying motion of those treetops is as though waving hands 
to console Seetha saying, "fear not... fear not..." [3-52-34]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: When the treetops, rather whole of a tree is swaying, will not the birds abiding on 
it chirp and chitter? Yes! They will. Thus, the birds are twittering and trees are swaying their tops 
for a bon voyage. The chirrups of the birds are abhaya vaakyaaH the 'expression of good wishes 
to a departing traveller...' and the swaying motion of treetops are abhaya hasta abhinaya are 
the 'gesturing with raised and swaying hands wishing good to a departing traveller... etc. minus voicing, 
as with 'ta-ta, cheerio, best of luck...'. The word is 'tree' which comes out of earth and stands on 
earth, thus an earth-born one. Seetha is also an earth-born one and kindred of trees, i.e., nature. 
Nature itself is assuring Seetha to not to fear.

Shlok 35: With wilted lotuses and scared fishes and other beings moving in water the lotus lakes are unenthusiastically 
sorrowing for Maithili as though Seetha is their girlfriend.



The lakes with lotuses as their faces, and fishes as their eyes, and with the other facial adornments 
like the swimming, sweeping and sailing water-moving beings like tortoises, waterfowls and the like 
are unenthused, for a similar girlfriend of theirs, the lotus-faced, fish-eyed, lotus-modelled Seetha 
is beleaguered, and thus they are sorrowing for such a selfsame Maithili. [3-52-35]

Shlok 36: All lions, tigers, animals and birds have then gathered in herds from all-over and ran rancorously and 
pursuantly shadowing the shadow of Seetha. [3-52-36]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: Even the cruellest animals will be compassionate, if only humans are compassionate 
to them. Neither Seetha scared any animal nor any animal scared Seetha. This may be a useful verse for 
Animal Rights Activists.

Shlok 37: The mountains appeared bewailing with their waterfalls as shedding tears and with their peaks as upraised 
arms, while Seetha is thus being abducted. [3-52-37]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo:A mountain cannot fly up to confront Ravana like an eagle, nor it can express its anguish 
like a swaying tree or a chirping bird, nor it cannot doggedly run after like lions and other animals, 
thus it is a 'cannot but situation' for any mountain to sit back and weep, as it is sessile. The eyes 
do not shed tears only in one direction. So also, the waterfalls are shed in many directions at the 
face-level of mountains, but not from their peaks. Then how to express their anguish bodily, to her 
who is up above the sky or pray the Almighty to rescue her? Hence, their raised mountaintops are their 
upraised arms, expressing all of their anguish, more so, with the booming weepy noise of the air coming 
out their caves, which in normal situations will be like the booming voicing of Sama Veda.

Shlok 38: On seeing Vaidehi who is being abducted thus, magnificent Sun in firmament is saddened, and lowly weakened 
is his sunshine, palely whitened is his sun-disc, and faintly deadened is his solar constant. [3-52-38]

Shlok 39- 40a: "When Ravana is abducting none other than the wife of Rama, then there is no probity. At such a juncture, 
how conscience can prevail? Unfounded are candour and compassion," thus the throngs of all beings overly 
regretted. [3-52-39, 40a]

Shlok 40b- 41a: Verily frightened are the fawns of deer, and their saddened faces are with tear shedding eyes with flustered 
looks, and they looked up and up at Seetha in sky and wept. [3-52-40b, 41a]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: The fawns are frightened because they have very broad and comely eyes like Seetha and 
someday some seducer like Ravana may also lead them astray, as collapsed is the equilibrium of conscience, 
candour or compassion. Hence, they are peeking out skyward repeatedly while Seetha is also looking down 
for Rama and Lakshmana, where the commonality is in the fawn-eyes filled with tears, both to the fawns 
and Seetha.

Shlok 41b- 42a: On seeing Seetha who is undergoing anguish in that way the sylvan deities physically shuddered in a 
worst way. [3-52-41b, 42a]

Shlok 42b- 43: She who is looking searchingly at the plane of earth for Rama or Lakshmana, and truly bawling in high-pitched 
but mellowly voice calling "Rama, Lakshmana", and whose hair-lengths are tousled, and whose felicitous 
vermilion mark on her forehead is smudged very untidily, that Decahedral demon abducted such an uncompromising 
husband-devout, Vaidehi, only for his self-ruination. [3-52-42a, 43]

Shlok 44: She who is already detracted from her kinsfolk in Mithila or in Ayodhya, that Maithili with pretty teeth 
and clean-cut smile is then distanced from the only two last kinsmen, for either Raghava or Lakshmana 
or both are unseen by her, and thus her face is paled for she is chastened by the cumber of consternation. 
[3-52-44]

[Commentary] There are many taboos annexed to woman saying that 'a woman is untouchable by other men...' and much 
discussion is also there in Ramayana. For this, the commentator of Dharmaakuutam says, that when Seetha 
herself said to Hanuma that touching other men is indecent in Sundara Kanda, Ch. 37, at verses 60 or 
so: bhartur bhaktim puraskrtya raamaat anyasya vaanara | na aham spraShTum padaa gaatram iccheyam 
vaanarottama || yadaham gaatra samsparsham raavaNasya gataa balaat | aniishaa kim kariShyaami vinaathaa 
vivashaa satii ||  the commentator questions 'how then can she embrace Jataayu, let alone touching?' 
and in answer he says iti hanuumantam prati para puruSha sparshana maatram anucitam iti vakShyasi 
| evam taadR^ishiiyam siitaa para puruSham jataayuSham katham aali~Ngatavati iti cet na | duShTa bhaavena 
para puruSha aali~Nganasya doShatvo api duHkha parihaaraaya aatura buddhi sparshane doSham a-bhaavaat 
| tatra - gautamaH - strii prekShaNa aalmbhane maithun kaa~NkShayaam - varjayet iti sheShaH | atra - 
mitraakSharaa - prakasheNa iikShaNam avayavasho niruupaNam - na yaadR^icchika darShanam | aalambhanam 
sparShanam | maithuna sha~Nkaayaam iti vacanaat baalaayaam - vR^iddhaayaam - aaturaayaam svasya ca baalaadeH 
na doSha iti | evam saamaanyatayaa baala vR^iddha aaturaaNaam para puruShaaNaam striibhiH sparshane 
kR^ito api na doShaH ||

[Commentary] 'advances towards a woman with a libidinous look, or a voluptuous gesticulation 
or lustful approaches are 'immoral' but mere touching or embracing age-old people, people in anguish 
etc, is as good as fondling her own babies...' Again according to gautama suutraa-s 
'lustful eying, or teasingly hankering after other's women is to be avoided...'

[Commentary] Even the
mitraakshara 'A treatise of Friendlily Advises' says: 'seeing voyeuristically, 
bodily gesticulations, habitual observations, or hankering after lustfully etc., are immoral for a man 
of age at any woman...' This is discussed for the act of Seetha in hugging Jataayu at last verse of 
previous chapter of this Aranya Kanda: punaH ca samgR^ihya ruroda 'again 
taken into hands, wept away...' Some publications of this Gorakhpur version has this word
samgR^ihya a word of less intensity, 'taken into hands...' has a replacement
parishvajya, aali.ngya the words with clear-cut action, 'embraced, hugged 
a dying eagle with a fatherly affection. Therefore it does not mean women are 'untouchables' in general.

[Commentary] From Ravana's side his curse is that, 'his head splinters into 
thousands of pieces if he touches other's woman...' But it is not yet splintered though he handled Seetha 
that roughly. Hence, that curse in its actuality is 'raping' but not mere 'touching' of body parts. 
Touching the 'untouchable' parts of other's women, that too without proper and full consent of that 
woman. As such, though he touched Seetha, carried on his flanks, took to his Lanka on his own body, 
he gives her time to reconcile herself, but does not make haphazard advances unilaterally. Thus, a difference 
between touching and fondling, grasping and caressing is established and it is no sin or taboo for any 
woman to do so.



SARGA 53
------------------------------

[Text] Seetha denounces Ravana's misdeed and challenges him to brave her husband in a manly
combat, rather than thieving her in a mousy way. She reasons with him about his propriety in
abducting other's wives, in vainglory.

Shlok 1: Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, on seeing the skyward flight of Ravana taking her
along became highly frantic and remaining in highest dismay she is distraught. [3-53-1]

Shlok 2: Seetha whose eyes turned coppery-red with tears and resentment, still outpouring
tears while being abducted she piteously poured this scorn on that gory-eyed demon's chief, Ravana.
[3-53-2]

Shlok 3: "You knave Ravana, you are taking flight on thieving me after prowling about my
loneliness, such as you are, are you not ashamed in the least for this subterfuge. [3-53-3]

Shlok 4: "You black-hearted fiend, for sure, you alone sidelined my husband in a trickish
guise of Golden Deer wishful to abduct me as you are a coward. [3-53-4]

Shlok 5: "Which king of eagles battled against you to bail me out, an old friend of my
father-in-law, such as he is he is also felled, indeed. [3-53-5]

[Commentary] Annex: 'You have felled an old and withered eagle after a long-drawn battle...
then, how long can you battle that Raghava? Does this felling of an age-old eagle adds any feather
to your crown?'

Shlok 6: "Ah, truly what an audacious audacity is shown by you... you basely demon... by
ear-shattering your great name saying that 'I am Ravana...' I am conquered in a combat -
Really?



"Am I conquered by you in a combat between my husband and you, wherein you on
announcing your name to my husband and truly showing your audacious audacity defeated my husband,
and thus triumphing over me - or what? Tell me, you mousy demon...



"Unable to conquer my husband in a combat, but able to earbash your name to a lonely
woman and abducting her, will this tantamount to your apparently audacious audacity? Thus, I am not
really triumphed over by a lowly demon like you... [3-53-6]

Shlok 7: "A woman, that too a lonely one, that too the other man's wife, that too an
abduction, but not winning or wooing her... you knave, on your undertaking such a kind of
deplorable deed, how unashamed are you? [3-53-7]

[Commentary] Annex: 'Will not the other males deplore you for your unmasculine female
stealing, for this kind of undertaking is unobserved even in animal world?'

Shlok 8: "A self-glorifier as you are, this highly inhuman, iniquitous, imputable deed of
yours will be recounted by all men in all worlds. [3-53-8]

[Commentary] Annex: 'For this is an unmanly action of yours, all the manly men wish to
recount this as a fabulously fabled account, in dissent, for exemplification of their manliness and
also to retroject your self-vainglory...'

Shlok 9: "Damn with what you have said then about your might and mettle... damn with this
kind of your demeanour which is lamentable to whole of your clan in this world. [3-53-9]

[Commentary] Annex: 'You were boastful of your triumphs and victories at the time of
captivating me, damn with them... since there is not an iota of gallantry in thieving me, a lonely
one in the thick of the forests... and this misdemeanour of yours which not only ruins you but
becomes a lamentable affair to whole of your clan, while being burnt in the infernos of Raghava's
arrows...'

Shlok 10: "What can be done possibly... why because you are fleeing very speedily in this
way... wait for a moment to ascertain whether you can go back in aliveness... [3-53-10]

[Commentary] Annex: 'You are fleeing as though death is haunting you... death is at your
behind... wait, wait and stay... it will approach you speedily... when death nears you, let us
watchfully ascertain whose is glory or whose is vainglory... between your Death similar Raghava and
deadened you...'

Shlok 11: "On your coming into the line of sight of those two princes, even if you are with
whole of your military, you will be incapacitated to live on, indeed even for a moment...
[3-53-11]

Shlok 12: "Anywise it will be incapable of you to endure the touch of their arrows, as with a
bird that cannot endure the overly flaring up wildfire in a forest. [3-53-12]

[Commentary] Annex: 'After all, birds flee by the very touch of fiery air of forest fire even
it is burning distantly... thus, where is the question of your tolerating those infernos, called my
husband's arrows, shot from long, long a distance... and whereby you can stop them from hitting
you, or with what you can retaliate them...'

Shlok 13- 14a: "Oh, Ravana, positively contemplate in your soul and politely release me... and if
you do not release me, indeed by the rancour of insulting me, my husband along with his brother
devises your doom... [3-53-13, 14a]

[Commentary] All women, without exception, have a weapon called prathama kopam 'a
preambular fury...' it is exactly not 'fury' but a sort of bewilderment and insultment meted out by
their indignation. Seetha spewed out a stomachful of ire. Pausing a while, she now started to
sermonise this demon with hita bodha 'moral teaching...' thinking in 'his' shoes and
foreseeing 'his' annihilation. What and why does he care? And how does she bother for his
well-being? These questions have their answers in mythology.

Shlok 14b- 15a: "You rogue! By which endeavour you are desirous of thieving me under duress, that
endeavour of yours behoves absurd. [3-53-14b, 15a]

[Commentary] Seetha's wording should have been 'for lovemaking with me...' instead of
'endeavour' but as an urbane lady, she used a + graamya pada prayoga, 'urbane' language rather than
the graamya bhaaSa 'boorish wording.' Her calculated and cultured talking indicates her staunchness
in her 'husband-devoutness...'

Shlok 15b- 16a: "Though I am in aliveness now, but on my going under the control of an enemy and on
unseeing godlike husband of mine I am indeed unenthused to bear up my lives for a long.
[3-53-15]

[Commentary] Again she may recount her list of 'suicide programs' as related to Lakshmana
after this dialogue. She prefers to use whatever means to end her life, rather than to surrender to
immorality. To indicate this 'character's mood' paatra aucityam  of Seetha, all her opinions about
'somebody's possessing her' were listed when Lakshmana was hastened after Rama, though at the cost
of Lakshmana's steadfastness in his duty.

Shlok 16b- 17a: "Definitely and completely unanticipated in your heart are either that which is
worthwhile or that which is beneficial to you, as mortals undertake a quirkily behaviour at the
time of their death...



"At the time of their death mortals wish to enjoy noxious and non-recuperative
foods, thus definitely and completely unanticipated in your heart are either nontoxic or beneficial
nourishments for your well-being. [3-53-16b, 17a]

[Commentary] Annex: 'Bechanced is your death-time hence you behave eccentrically and as a
dying person wants to feast on with disagreeable foods, you also would like to consume a lethal
poison, that is me, and on your death Yama, the Terminator, is ready to offer you a sumptuous feast
with hellish edibles...'

Shlok 17b- 18a: "But which is recuperative that is unpalatable to all of the death-rattlers, and
indeed, I behold you as one around whose throat the noose of Time is looped. [3-53-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: "As you are dauntless in this daunting situation as for yourself, oh, Decahedral
demon, indeed it is clear that you are clearly fantasising the ill-omened golden trees all around.
[3-53-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: "Oh, Ravana, you will see the ghastly River Vaitarani which will be tumultuously
streaming with blood streams, also thus you will see the grisly sword-leaved-forests in hell.
[3-53-19b, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: "You will see silk-cotton trees flowered with molten gold, shrouded with lapis
gemlike melting leaves, and enshrouded with sharp irony thorns in hell. [3-53-20b, 21a]

[Commentary] Annex: Then Ravana may retort her by saying 'if such a condition comes, it comes
after my death... but while living I will enjoy you and your company...' for this 'as on date
enjoyment' of Ravana, she is repudiating him with her next statement... 'you have already quaffed
off a venom, called Seetha... dwindled is your lifetime...'

[Commentary] This is a kind of punishment in a section called asi patra vana
'sword-leaved-forest...' in the Hell of Yama, namely naraka. The sinners are asked to hug a
silk-cotton tree like wooden structure with golden leaves and sappharine flowers and irony thorns,
where all these items will be sweltering the sinners besides pinching and piercing with thorns.
This punishment is aimed at those who abduct, molest, or rape the other man's wife.

Shlok 21b- 22a: "Oh, unmerciful one, on doing this kind of misdeed to that noble-souled Rama you are
incapable to bear up life for a long time like the one who quaffed venom. [3-53-21b, 22a]

[Commentary] Then Ravana may say 'nonsense, these venoms, poisons, toxins... all these things
can do nothing to me as I am immortalised, I take you off to a distant place, come what may...' for
that Seetha is saying that 'the lasso of the Time is very long, but its noose is just throat sized
and that noose is already noosed around your throat, called arm-length-sized arrow of Rama, already
shot from his bowstring, called sting-like Seetha, as I am his and only his... as such, inescapable
you are, anywhere you go...'

Shlok 22b- 23a: "You are bound by the unpreventable lasso of the Time, oh, Ravana, on going where
you will get complacency from that uncompromising husband of mine? [3-53-22b, 23a]

[Commentary] Ravana may say: 'is it? What is the proof of his mettle basing on which you
sermonise me?' For this, her reply is in the next verse.

Shlok 23b- 24- 25a: "By whom fourteen thousand demons are killed in war just within a minute,
single-handedly without any help from his brother, how then that brave and mighty Raghava, an
expert in all kinds of missiles, will not eliminate you, the stealer of his chosen wife, with his
mordant arrows?" Thus Seetha poured forth her ire at Ravana. [3-53-23b, 24, 25a]

Shlok 25b: On saying this much and other exacting words, Vaidehi who has gone onto the flank of
Ravana, indeed lamented lamentably as her dismay is coalesced with her distress. [3-53-25b, c]

Shlok 26: She who is highly agonised and weeping before talking, a ranter who ranted much, a
resentful lady who has come of age, and a pitiable whirler in the hands of demon whose whirligig
has transformed into spasmodic jerking of her body for deliverance from that sinner, and in that
way that sinner stole that princess Seetha. [3-53-26]



SARGA 54
------------------------------

[Text] Seetha drops her ornaments at Sugreeva and other monkeys available on a mountaintop
during the course of her abduction. Ravana does not take notice of this as he is hurrying as though
haunted by Rama. On crossing the southerly ocean, his jitteriness in stealing Seetha ceases and he
hypocritically feels elated in gaining both Seetha and an animosity with Rama.

Shlok 1: Vaidehi has not seen any rescuer while she is abducted, but she has seen five
prominent vanara-s staying on a mountaintop. [3-54-1]

Shlok 2- 3a: That broad-eyed and curvaceous lady with resentment Seetha, inwrapping her
auspicious ornaments in the upper-fringe of her sari, dropped in the midmost of those five Vanara-s
with a thinking that 'these creatures may perhaps indicate them to Rama.' [3-54-2, 3a]

[Commentary] Some say that Seetha shore her upper cloth and bundled the ornaments while some
others say that whole of the upper cloth was dropped. The Indian sari
worn by those women of yore was in a different fashion, where they wore sari like the present day dhoti with pleated back
stuffing like men, but they also used an upper cloth enough to cover their busts. A three-piece
dress is a must, either to man or a woman in Indian style. It comprises of a loincloth dhoti or
sari, and a shirt-like or a jacket-like bust cover, and an upper-cloth to hang on the shoulder to
men or to muffle the bust for women. So some say the whole of upper cloth of Seetha is dropped
bundled with ornaments.

Shlok 3b- 4a: On his part that Decahedron Ravana has not noticed her action in whipping up her
silky upper-cloth and ornaments, their bundling and stowing away at five vanara-s, owing to his own
hurry. [3-54-3]

[Commentary] Ravana is in his own hurry because Rama may have heard the wailing of Seetha and
thus may be chasing him, or will chase his shortly. He bothers like this until he crosses the ocean
and enters his city-state Lanka. There he is absolutely secured. Until such time his 'mousy
thievishness' haunts him. But Seetha is on his flank and under his arm, her trunk turned against
his. Then she shortly saw the oddish Vanara-s, who look unlike ordinary monkeys, but with some
presumably pro-human and non-demonic features, yet monkeyish with some regality, and then she
quickly plucked off her ornaments and upcast her upper-cloth, and hastily but carefully, bundled
her jewellery and downcast that bundle at them.

[Commentary] These ornaments are said to be one nosering, one earring, one bracelet, one
biceps-let, one anklet with tinkling bells - all from her right side - because showing
ornaments/items worn on left-side to husband is held improper. The anklet that has fallen from her
leg on earth, in earlier chapters, is from her left leg.

Shlok 4b- 5a: Those ochreish-eyed best Vanara-s with their unwinking eyes have observed the
broad-eyed Seetha, who at that time is verily wailing. [3-54-4b, 5a]

[Commentary] The 'wink-less-ness' is the property of celestials, thus the vanara-s saw with
wink-less eyes with their wide-eyed amazement. Here the Vanara-s are said to be bulishly impetuous
beings and if so, could they not have averted or countered Ravana - will be the question. It is a
regular scene for them to see this skywalker demon to carry off such goddess like ladies and they
have seen many women thus carried off. But this particular one is appearing to be somewhat
different, more over she is repeatedly calling for some 'Rama...' and she is wriggling in that
demon's capture. They know this demon to be Ravana and they even know of the alliance of Ravana
with Vali. If these handfuls of vanara-s dare Ravana, they die at the hands of Ravana instead at
the hand of Vali. Hence, they remained silent spectators to save themselves. This is why Sugreeva
did not indicate the way Seetha in which was abducted by 'some' demon, to Rama, in Kishkindha, when
they firstly met.

Shlok 5b- 6a: The chief of demons Ravana captivating Maithili, who is still wailing, has crossed
the Pampa region down underneath and advanced facing the City of Lanka. [3-54-5b, 6a]

[Commentary] So far Ravana's travel is proceeding with his looking backward, sideward, and
frontward, expecting any attack from anywhere, as this Dandaka or Janasthaana are his frontiers for
operation but not the areas of his stronghold. And when once these areas are crossed reaching
Pampa, there is no more self-confessed fear.

Shlok 6b- 7a: Ravana is jubilantly happy in stealing his own death alias Seetha, as one would
carry a stingingly fanged and lethally venomous she-snake in his own lap. [3-54-6b, 7a]

Shlok 7b- 8a: He bolted out in skyway up above the woodlands, waterways, pools, and mountains at
the double, as with an arrow bolting from a bow. [3-4-7b, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: On reaching the ocean, a housing for sharks, alligators, a home of Rain-god, a
never-draining deep and an ultimate course of the rivers, he hastily crossed it over. [3-54-8b,
9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: That ocean being the abode of Rain-god is highly flustered when Vaidehi is being
abducted over it, and its waves became topsy-turvy and its fishes and great marine-reptiles
remained shilly-shally. [3-54-9b, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: Then the siddha-s and caarana-s available in airspace averred saying, "this alone is
the end of Decahedron Ravana." [3-54-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 12a: Ravana entered the city of Lanka transporting Seetha, while she wriggling in his
flank, who appeared like the personified death of Ravana wriggling its way into his Lanka.
[3-54-11b, 12a]

Shlok 12b- 13a: On going towards the city Lanka that has well-symmetrized roadways, then he entered
his own palace-chambers which is with very many doors and chambers thronging with crowds.



On going towards the city Lanka that has well-symmetrized roadways, he then entered
his own palace chambers in which royal servants are thronging at many doorways as that palace has
very many chambers. [3-54-12b, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: Ravana placed down Seetha whose eyelashes are blackish and who is deep in
bewilderment caused by whimpering, therein his palace chambers, as demon Maya once kept his
lady-love, a nymphet called Hema, in a demonic Black Hole.



Ravana placed down Seetha whose eyelashes are blackish and who is deep in
bewilderment caused by whimpering, therein his palace chambers, as demon Maya kept his demonic
power in a Black Hole.



Ravana placed down Seetha whose eyelashes are blackish and who is deep in
bewilderment caused by whimpering, therein his palace chambers, as demon Maya had once kept al his
demonic scriptures duly usurping them from his own mentor, namely Shukracaarya, at an unknown
illusory place. [3-54-13b, 14a]

[Commentary] This verse has some divergences from the viewpoints of commentators.
Govindaraja's text uses maayaam iva striyam while Tilaka uses mayaH maayaam iva
aasuriim thereby the word 'aasurriim...' suggests that Ravana brought a maayaa siita
'an illusory Seetha...' instead of original Seetha, which original Seetha is said to have been in
safe keeping of Ritual-fire until the elimination of Ravana, and comes out of the same Ritual-fire
after the elimination of Ravana. A very big controversy surrounds this statement and whole of the
auxiliary Ramayana-s are brought in, along with puraaNa-s, which substantiate this
riddler, maayaa siita.

[Commentary] As it is, we do not find that much debatable aspect in Valmiki Ramayana, if the
statement that 'Ravana placed Seetha in an unapproachable Black Hole like Lanka, as Maya once
placed Hema in an unapproachable underground Black Hole...' is taken up. This episode of demon
Maya-Hema occurs in Kishkindha, Ch. 51, which may please be referred. Then it suffices to satisfy
the verbiage of aasuriim, when the analogy of 1] Lanka of Ravana and R^iksha
bila, 'Black Hole' of Maya, both being the constructions of artifice, and again between 2]
Maya, the demon and Ravana, the demon, [that too, the eliminable demons,] 3] nymphet Hema and
nymphal Seetha, [the causative factors for elimination,] and the actual eliminators Indra and Rama,
is taken into consideration.

[Commentary] The eyes of Seetha are said to be blackish at their ends. This is not mascara or
something like a makeup article. The eyelashes are longish like those of celestials, so as to give
a blackish orb around her eyeball and because she is now ceaselessly shedding tears, these
eyelashes are tear-wet and slanted edge-ward to give a blackish shade at the end of her eyes.

Shlok 14b- 15a: That Decahedron Ravana also instructed the bogey-sightly bogeywomen, "your watch and
ward shall be in such a way that neither a female nor a male can see Seetha impermissibly."
[3-54-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: "Whatever she wishes to have, gold, jewels, pearls, apparels or adornments, they all
be given to her as you would give me according to my whimsies. [3-54-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: "Whosoever speaks unpleasant words to Vaidehi in the least, either unknowingly or
knowingly, her life becomes unpleasant for herself." Thus Ravana ordered the chamber-demonesses.
[3-54-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18: On speaking to those demonesses thus that chief of demons exited from that palace
chamber, and giving a thought to what is to be done in sequel, then he gave audience to eight
highly vigorous demons, the feasters on raw-flesh. [3-54-17b, 18]

Shlok 19: He who is egocentric by the boon awarded by Brahma for his invincibleness, that
Ravana on giving an audience to those eight demons spoke this sentence to them praiseful of their
might and valour. [3-54-19]

Shlok 20: "You immediately take up multiple assaultive weaponry and begone from here to
Janasthaana speedily, a place now deadpanned for demons, which earlier was the placement of Khara.
[3-54-20]

Shlok 21: "Throwaway your fright faraway and you stay in that Janasthaana which fell void as
the demons are voided by someone called Rama, and there you shall stay self-assuredly and
self-confidently. [3-54-21]

[Commentary] Then those eight demons may as, 'when these many leading warriors and commanders
are there why we eight are picked and chosen?' for this Ravana is saying 'you eight are
self-assured and self-confident and can to mete out any assault on our race...' and again they may
hesitate as to 'why we should depend on our own personal strengths...' for that Ravana is saying 'a
still mightier Dushana, still mightiest Khara are eliminated... thus you perk up your sprites,
personally...'

Shlok 22: "Though highly forceful forces are deployed in Janasthaana, Rama's arrows have
utterly destroyed them, together with Khara and Duushana. [3-54-22]

[Commentary] Expecting another enquiry from them as, 'when such mighty, mightier, and
mightiest demons are dead at the hand of a lonely Rama, do you wish us also die in the same way?'
and to them Ravana is saying 'you are the next best in line of order of military, hence it is your
turn to assume command, as committed soldiers, as I am at loggerheads with Rama...' Ravana follows
such 'order of priorities' in warring scrupulously and we chance to meet them in Yuddha Kanda,
canto of Great War.

Shlok 23: "Thereby an unprecedented fury is escalating over and above my courage, and an
unhindered and unforgivable animosity towards that Rama is evoked in me. [3-54-23]

[Commentary] Then the eight commandant demons may say 'what if, let all of us wage a war and
end him up...' for that Ravana is saying suggestively that 'my fury is hovering over my courage...
thus fury alone is scaling up, while courage is scaling down... as I came to know that only one was
warring against fourteen thousand demons and eliminated all... thus we cannot wage large scale war
overtly when our courage is lessening... but we can covertly do some kind of harm... hence, you go
there and undertake any kind of activity that will be harmful to that Rama... as I am uncourageous
and uncomfortable, as of now...'

Shlok 24: "I wish to cast out my begrudging against my enemy who bears a grudge against me,
and indeed, to me 'sleep' is not the word for it, until my enemy is undone in a war. [3-54-24]

[Commentary] By an enforced enmity one's own sleep vanishes as he will always be wakeful of his enemy, for he who 
has purchased enmity is a weakling and worthless to confront... vidura niiti: Maha Bharata, Udyoga 
parve: anena balavad virodhino nidraa na bhaviShyati iti suucitam | tathaa ca udyoge viduraH - ayuktam 
balavataa durbalam hiina saadhanam | hR^ita svam kaaminam coram aavishanti pra jaagaraaH || - dk

Shlok 25: "I for myself will be comfortable only on eliminating him who has eliminated Khara
and Duushana as with a pauper acquiring riches. [3-54-25]

Shlok 26: "While you remain in Janasthaana you have to accurately bring me the information
about Rama's activities and deportment. [3-54-26]

Shlok 27: "Do not go heedlessly, you all night-walkers, for that Rama appears to be too
dangerous, and on your going there heedfully, you have to continually try for the elimination of
that Raghava. [3-54-27]

Shlok 28: "I am aware of your might in battle fronts for a number of times, as such I have
commissioned you all in that Janasthaana." Thus Ravana spoke to those eight demons. [3-54-28]

Shlok 29: Then on picking up those words amiable to all intents and purposes of Ravana, those
eight demons departed from Lanka on hailing Ravana, and they collectively journeyed in the
direction of Janasthaana with their imperceivable appearances. [3-54-29]

Shlok 30: Ravana is then highly gladdened well and truly on gaining over Seetha, and even for
holding sway over that Maithili, and equally for the well-wrought and archly animosity with Rama,
whereby that demon Ravana is hypocritically amused. [3-54-30]

[Commentary] The wording in this verse mohaat mudiataH sa raakshasaH together with the word hR^iSTaH 
raavaNaH at verse 6, is discussed by commentators stating that he is self-conceitedly and hypocritically 
lost in his own hallucinations of possessing Seetha. Tilaka commentary says that bringing Seetha to 
Lanka is a villainous act but not with an iota of reverence to her, when elucidating verse 1 of next 
chapter where it contains: aatmaanam buddhi vaiklbyaat kR^ita kR^ityam amanyata... 'he believed 
in his own self that he achieved a great feat, as his brain gone astray foolishly...' But the poet also 
says proximately that he is amused in gaining an archenemy's animosity, i.e. that of Rama. 
It is therefore said that he is happy as his release from his accursed demon-hood is set to happen soon, 
as he achieved the abduction of Seetha, thus paved way for Rama to come to Lanka to release him from 
his accursed being. This is supported by the statement in verse that Ravana's words have some mahaa 
artham 'words with allusion, or secret message' to Rama perhaps, as at verse 29.

[Commentary] If Lanka is a body, it embodies pleasure seeking traits seated in manas 'pleasuring heart...' 
along with an 'ever witnessing soul...' called saakshi buuta aatma. Along with the release 
of captivated soul, called Seetha, this pleasure seeking manas 'heart' also gets released. 
And the releaser or the deliverer is Rama, and hence Ravana is happy.



SARGA 55
------------------------------

[Text] Ravana entices Seetha to marry him by demonstrating various luxuries and comforts, and even baiting 
her to become his empress. The words of Ravana have some latent meanings as derived by ancient commentators 
and they are included here, as far as possible.

Shlok 1: On directing those eight ghastly demons Ravana is amused in his heart of hearts that he has accomplished 
a great feat. [3-55-1]

Shlok 2: On continually musing upon Vaidehi Ravana is tormented with the arrows of Love-god, thereby to lay eyes 
on Seetha he post-hastily entered the beautiful palace. [3-55-2]

Shlok 3: On entering the palace-chamber that supremo of demons beheld Seetha overwhelmed with ruefulness amongst 
demonesses. [3-55-3]

Shlok 4- 5- 6: She whose visage is brimming over with tears, one browbeaten and downtrodden with the burden of bewail, 
one capsized like a boat that is about to capsize in an ocean spreadeagled with whirlwinds, and one 
alike an impala altogether swerved from its herd of impala yet hemmed in with dog-wolves, that nightwalker 
came nigh of such a Seetha whose face is downcast unwilling to see any, and to such a pitiable Seetha 
who is in the shackles of her sorrow, that supremo of demons compellingly started to show his palace 
which is similar to any paradisiacal palace. [3-55-4, 5, 6]

[Commentary] Then he must have hauled her by her hand or demonesses must have dragged all along the corridors, chambers 
and all over, or as usual, he must have carried her on his flank to show his palace. Taking this situation 
and the statement at verse 1, aatmaanam buddhi vaiklavyaat  Rama Tilaka negates the idea 
that Seetha is brought to Lanka as a much cherished Goddess Lakshmi, but her bringing is only with a 
villainous intent. Even then, the supporters of Ravana - the devotee - disagree. There are many such 
slants given to Ravana's dialogs, to portray him as a devotee, in this chapter itself.

Shlok 7- 8- 9a: That paradisiacal mansion house of Decahedral Ravana is congestive with innumerable cupolaed skyscrapers, 
adored with thousands of females, frequented by diverse bevies of birds, and it comprised of numerous 
gemstones. The pillars are amazingly gilded with engraving of ivory, gilt, quartz, silvern linocuts, 
and they are even embossed with diamonds and with lapis gems, which are heart-pleasing for a look. The 
drumbeats of divine drums are echoing in entire palace, and its archways are adorned with the gildings 
of pure gold. [3-55-7, 8, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10: Ravana walked up the wonderful golden staircase along with Seetha, and the rows of skyscrapers with 
windows that are ivoried and silvered and with window-blinds are seen from the windows of the landing 
on that flight of stairs, which are also ivoried and silvered windows with window-blinds, and all are 
amusing for sight. [3-55-9b, 10]

[Commentary] Did she walk on her own or was she dragged on the flight of stairs? Yes! She had to walk up the staircase 
after Ravana, but defiantly and straggly.

Shlok 11: That Decahedral Ravana displayed the multiple stories of his own palace which is all over white-marbled 
and diamond encrusted to Maithili. [3-55-11]

Shlok 12: Ravana continued to display the descendible wellsprings and leisure pools from which diverse flowers 
have sprung and overspread them, regardless of Seetha's languishing under her anguish. [3-55-12]

[Commentary] Has she seen all these riches of Ravana? Yes! She had seen, but in disdain and scorn. Refraining and 
desisting from allurement is possible only on seeing the objects of lure. And yielding to such an opulent 
demon or his opulence, just for the sake of carnality, is beyond the scope of Seetha's thinking according 
to her reply to Ravana, in next chapter 'all this affluence is going to be reduced to ashes...' keeping 
Rama in view as the reducing agent, for Hanuma, the actual reducer of this affluence, is yet an unknown 
entity.

Shlok 13: On flaunting his best palace in its entirety to Vaidehi that dirty-minded Ravana spoke this sentence 
to Seetha in order that she may be tempted on her own, lustily. [3-55-13]

Shlok 14- 15a: "Oh, Seetha, ten crores of first-rated demons are there, furthermore, twenty-two crores of demons of 
ghastly exploits are there, thus all put together, three hundred twenty millions of demons are there 
in Lanka, omitting the weakish, oldish, youngish demons. For all of them I am the lord." Thus Ravana 
started his self-eulogy. [3-55-14, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16: "For every single work of mine a thousand servitors will rush in. Such as I am I pledge entire life 
of mine along with the suzerainty of this sovereign city-state Lanka to you, oh, broad-eyed lady, for 
you are loftier than my lives. [3-55-15b, 16]

Shlok 17: "Oh, Seetha, you will become an empress for all of the those countless females of finest fabric amassed 
by me, oh, dear, if only you marry me. [3-55-17]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: Ravana the devotee is saying: 'oh, Seetha... you become my empress and lord over me 
and all of my wives that are amassed by me... for, You are the most adorable Goddess Lakshmi, and now 
though appearing in a gross form of Seetha, you are the real Subtlety, Goddess Lakshmi... bhaaryaa; 
bhaa= cidruupiNii= oh, Subtlety; aaryaa = oh, adorable one; a+bhava = oh, Redeemer;
priye = most adorable Goddess Lakshmi.'

Shlok 18: "You be keen on my amiable words and it will be apt of you to show compassion on me, for I have burning 
desire for you, and of what use is your thinking conversely about that long-lost Rama? [3-55-18]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: The word kaama is ellipted here as it appears in other mms. Then it is said 
' kaama 'desirous... I have the burning desire of regaining my servitude at your door...' thus
maam bhajasva 'me, you accept accordingly...'

Shlok 19: "It is impossible to assail this Lanka even for Indra with all of the gods and demons, as an ocean roundly 
enshrouds this Lanka which is hundred-yojana-s witdthwise. [3-55-19]

Shlok 20: "I behold none matchable to my vitality is existent among gods; among yaksha-s - no; among gandharva-s 
- no; among sages - no, nor anyone in any world. [3-55-20]

Shlok 21: "What can you achieve with that dethroned, hapless, seer, vagrant Rama who is short-lived, for after 
all, he is a human with littlest vitality? [3-55-21]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: Ravana, the devotee is saying: 'Why this wasteful lamenting about an un-lamentable 
entity, called Rama, for he is raajya bhraSTa yena 'by whom enemies are dethroned...' raajyaat 
bhrSTaa ripavo yasmaat tena and take this as one word diinenataapasenagataayuSaa by which 
I mean... diina ina taapasa ina gata aayuSaa where ina means 'lord...' thus a lord 
of hapless, a lord for seers, and maanuSeNa gataayuSaa whereby 'for a man who gained longevity...' 
that is ekaa dasha sahasra samvatsara parimita aayuSa yena gataH - praaptaH, saH 'one who has 
achieved eleven thousands years of age in human incarnation...' in which he has to lord over and save 
the saints, sages, seers and such hapless lot...' and alpa tejasaa by which I mean alpam 
itareSaam teejo yasmaat tena 'by whom others' resplendency is dwindled and lessened, just by his 
own resplendence... about such raameNa kim? Why you bother about such Rama, since he is 
parama puruSa the Supreme Person?

Shlok 22: "Oh, Seetha, you apotheosise me only for I am your seemliest husband, oh, jumpy lady, indeed, primeness 
has impermanence, thus here you be blithesome with me. [3-55-22]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: Ravana, the devotee is saying, me yauvanam 'my lifespan...' where the word
yauvana indicates total lifespan from childhood, to young age, to old age... 'Thereby the total 
lifespan of mine is a + dhruvam 'impermanent...' life itself is impermanent... and with elliptic
yataH 'whereby...' aham tava sadR^ishaH 'I am your seemliest... bhartaa; bibharti 
shushruuSa aadinaa svaaminam iti bharta= sevakaH 'a servant...' and with elliptic ataH 
'thereby...' maa bhajava 'me alone, you deify, as un-godly beings cannot be in the service 
of Goddess Lakshmi... take me as your servant...' maameva= maa ava 'me, deliver... accord deliverance...' 
for that you stay here in Lanka maya saha which cleaves like maa= lakshmi, raajya lakshmi 
'with Fortune of Kingdom...' saha 'along with...' ramasva 'you grace us...'

[Commentary] 'Whereby my lifespan is impermanent to adore you, thereby you deify me from this accursed being to be 
in your service constantly... for which I am the seemliest servant of yours... for that you stay in 
Lanka and grace me and this Fortune of Kingdom, till the arrival of Rama, and then accord deliverance 
through Rama...

Shlok 23: "Oh, beautifully visaged lady, it is needless to have half a mind to see that Raghava, oh, Seetha, even 
if his wits chariot him what is his calibre to come thither crossing an un-crossable ocean? [3-55-23]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: Rama is living by his own wits and wisdom to come to Lanka, and his chariot called 
heart, is ambitiously steered by that chariot's horses, called the five senses of Rama, towards Lanka 
alone all through this incarnation. And bechanced is that time and opportunity, thus he has to come 
here, hence oh, Seetha, you needn't worry...

Shlok 24: "It is impossible to knot the currents of cyclonic gusts in mid air, more so, it is impracticable to 
lay hold on the tongues of radiately irradiant fire. [3-55-24]

Shlok 25: "Oh, benefactress of bliss, he who can lead you back with his valour, while you are being fended off 
by my mighty arms, him I do not envisage even in any one world of this threefold world. [3-55-25]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: 'Who can manaH rathaiH api wishfully iha aagantum enter this Lanka, 
and if tried, he becomes a straw in the gale or char in flame... hence tam na pashyaami I don't 
foresee anyone else... raamam vinaa, iti seSaH 'excepting Rama...' ellipted. Thus, Rama is 
scheduled to come here as we have our own dealings, hence maa kR^ithaaH buddhim darshane raamasya 
don't get perturbed at mind in not seeing Rama... he comes soon...'

Shlok 26: "You rule over this very great empire of Lanka as an empress of Lanka, while me and mine, also thus 
all gods like me who hitherto are under my rule, and all mobile and sessile entities of whom I am the 
ruler, they too will hereafter make ourselves useful as your royal stewards, if you marry me. [3-55-26]

[Commentary] From now on Ravana is dedicating whatever he has or acquired to his benefactress, Goddess Lakshmi. By 
saying madvidhaa 'me-like...' it is aatma samarpaNa self-dedication...' lankaayaam 
raajyam anu paalaya 'from Lanka you rule over...' this is aatmiiya samarpaNa 'selfless 
dedication...'

Shlok 27- 28a: "Wet with the waters of anointment you be elated and then delight me. By your damnable dwelling in forests 
bygone is your bad-luck that you misdealt in bygone times. And what dutiable good deed is to be done 
by you in marrying me, you do that now, and secure the fruits of that good deed here by marrying me. 
[3-55-27, 28a]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: 'A damnable demon living in vana vaasena where vana is to betaken 
as waters, 'suchlike me living in an island surrounded by oceanic waters...' mayaa, iti sheSaH 
ellipted 'by me...' puraa yat duSkR^itam karma - kR^itam iti sheSaH 'earlier what sinful act...' 
ellipted 'was done...' tat= duSkarma; tava= mama iSTa devataa darshana maatreNa - gataH 'that 
sin - just by the chance of seeing my choicest deity Goddess Lakshmi - it has gone...' puraa maya 
sukR^ito yo dharmaH 'by which good deed I have done earlier...' tasya phalam 'its good 
results...' te - nivedayaami 'I surrender unto you... tat aapnuhi 'that you kindly 
accept...'

[Commentary] 'As a damnable and islanded demon living amidst water surrounded island, what all the evil-acts done 
by me are evanished just by getting a glimpse of my choicest deity Goddess Lakshmi in you, thus I am 
absolved of all demerits... and any merit, if remnant with me by my performing some good deeds, intentionally 
or unintentionally, I surrender the fruits of all those merits even, unto to you... pray accept...'

Shlok 28b: "Oh, Maithili, here all the garlands are divinely fragranced and the jewellery is topmost, you will 
dress up with them along with me should you become my wife. [3-55-28b]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: A woman is attractable by embellishments and nothing is uncommon about it. A commonplace 
devotee offers just a leaf, or a mere fruit, or at least water to his deity as Bhagavad Gita said:
phalam, puSpam, toyam 'a fruit, a leaf or water is enough to satisfy God...' since a mountainous 
God cannot be appeased with mountainy offerings. But here Ravana, the devotee wants to embellish his 
deity with divinely garlands and topmost jewellery... maya - samarpitaani iti sheSaH 'by me...' 
ellipted: 'offered...' saha= ekadaiva 'at least once...' sevasva 'accept them...' 
'Touch my offerings at least for once... thereby I deem that I am graced by you...'

Shlok 29b- 30a: "Oh, well-waisted lady, just by my might I notched up an aircraft known as Pushpaka from my brother 
Kubera in a war with him, which is similar sun in its shine. [3-55-29b. 30a]

Shlok 30b- 31a: "That aircraft is expansive and exhilarating, also its speed is on par with intuition, oh, Seetha, in 
that you can cheerfully fly about along with me, should you marry me. [3-55-30b, 31a]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: 'That aircraft maya - samarpite - iti sheSaH when I dedicated that aircraft 
to you...' sa artham= sarva sampadbhiH 'with all other riches, besides this aircraft... 
viharasva 'you enjoy...' 'Apart from this aircraft, I denounce all the riches I gained in you... 
you enjoy the fruits of my action and release me...'

Shlok 31b- 32a: "Oh, lady with a comely countenance, your visage is lotus similar in its shine, besides being immaculate, 
fairish and eyeful, but oh, curvaceous lady, with such a mushily maudlin of such a face this palace 
of mine is unbright, thus marry me to brighten everything" Thus Ravana spoke to Seetha. [3-55-31b, 32a]

Shlok 32b- 33a: While Ravana is speaking to her in this way that graceful lady Seetha veiled her moonier face with fringe 
of her sari, and stiflingly dispelled tears on that mooniest face behind her half-veil. [3-55-32b, 33a]

Shlok 33b- 34a: To her who is disconcerted and whose anguish marred her brilliance and who is appearing as though pondering 
over the question of her submittal to Ravana, or otherwise, although she is meditating, to such a Seetha 
Ravana the nightwalker said these words. [3-55-33b, 34a]

[Commentary] She allowed him to prattle whatever he wished, but when it is aimed at her face, she had to veil it 
customarily to conceal the flood of sobbing tears, aversely. But Ravana, being a leech of lechery, amusedly 
thinks that she is bashful, thus silent, and because silence is 'half-agreeing', thus he furthers his 
leeching.

Shlok 34b- 35a: "Oh, Vaidehi, enough is this embarrassment of yours presuming that your consorting with me is detrimental 
to scriptural canons, oh, empress, what that is approaching you in the form of queen-hood is absolutely 
compatible with the tradition.



"Oh, Vaidehi, enough is this embarrassment of yours presuming that your consorting with me is detrimental 
to scriptural canons, what that is approaching you in the mode of queen-hood is ordained by gods and 
it is absolutely traditional. [3-55-34b, 35a]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: 'Enough is this embarrassment alam vriidena in the matter of 'served and servant..'
ayam daiva niSSyandaH for this is preordained by gods... aarSaH 'age old, traditional, 
and perennial...' tvaam abhigamiSyati 'the same 'served and servant relation' is now approaching 
you... in this incarnation and nothing new about it, for this is preordained by gods, age old, perennial, 
and traditional, thus enough with your embarrassment... and accept me as your devotee...' Maheshvara 
Tiirtha.

[Commentary] Much is commented on this verse and this verse itself is held controversial as the meaning for niSyandaH 
as 'connection...' is said to be ill defined. Further, some versions use differently as shown above. 
It is said that yet another ancient mms of Ramayana contains the same verse as: alam vriiDena vaidehi 
dharma taapa kR^itena ca | harSho ayam devi vispaShTo yaH tvaam upagamiShyati || where the first 
foot is almost the same and the second foot: harSo ayam devi vispaSTo yaH tvaam upagamiSyati 
which means devi oh, lady yaH harSaH which pleasure you are going to get with your 
queen-hood tvaam upagamiSyati to you approaching in the mode of queen-hood ayam harSaH 
vispaSTaH that pleasure is evident...

[Commentary] 'Oh, Lady, which pleasure you are going to get as a queen, for that queen-hood is fast approaching you, 
that pleasure is evident... why then you presume that marrying me is anti-canonical, and thus be ashamed...' 
so said Ravana with a kind of epicurean philosophy.

[Commentary] A woman who marries twice is called punarbhuH and these are of three kinds. And then there 
is another type called svairiNi. The first category are the women who leave off their first 
husbands and get married to another, thus become the first punarbhuH and the svairiNi 
is the kind of women who will not care customs but follow their own course of alliances. para puurvaaH 
striyaH tvat anyaaH sapta proktaa svayambhuvaa | punarbhuuH trividhaa taasaam tu svairiNii catur vidhaa 
|| naarada Then Ravana is supposed to have argued with Seetha 'you become a punarbhuH 
or choose whatever kind of scriptural statement about the rules of remarriages, but marry me - Govindaraja.

[Commentary] There is another kind of Indian marriage called raakshasa vivaaha loosely: 'demonical marriage...' 
i.e., abducting a girl with her consent and marrying secretly. But this 
way of raakshasa vivaaha 'marriage through abduction...' is admissible only to unmarried girls 
but not to the married women. Hence, the scriptural canons again cannot be satisfied. Therefore Ravana 
is said to have stated all this as an eyewash due to his tamo guNa praadhaanyata 'stupid contrivance 
of scripture with his stolidity of mind...' Maheshvara Tirtha

[Commentary] 'If Ravana is stupid enough to distort scriptures how then can his - devotee-goddess relation - with 
Seetha can be established...' is the question of Rama Tilaka. Thus, it is concluded that Ravana's advances 
are only with a lecherous intent, contrary to what Maheshvara Tiirtha tried to establish Ravana as a 
devotee... Tilaka.

[Commentary] In spite of all these debates and counter-debates of commentators - Ravana remained as a devotee of 
Seetha, namely Goddess Lakshmi, legendarily.

Shlok 35b- 36a: "Let these two feet of yours be massaged by my ten heads, do me favour readily, for I am your subordinate 
and servant. [3-55-35b. 36a]

Shlok 36b- 36c: "I with a lustful hollow-heart spoke all these hollow words that are unbefitting to my stature, indeed, 
Ravana will never supplicate headlong to whosoever woman. [3-55-36b, 36c]

[Commentary] Here the expression shunyaaH is held inconvenient to derive proper meaning and another ancient 
mms is said to have this as: na imaaH shuunyaaH kR^ithaa vaacaH shuSyamaaNena bhaaSitaaH where 
the wordage is shunnyamaanena emptied by lust...' imaaH vaacaH 'these words...'
shuunyaaH 'empty...' na kR^ithaa 'do not make them...' 'Nullified by lust I spoke 
all these words... and you, on taking them as mere nullities, pray, do not nullify my lovelorn words...' 
Tiirtha calls this as rasaabhaasa 'desiring an undesirous woman of others, by hook or by crook.

Shlok 37: That Decahedral Ravana on speaking thus to Maithili, who is the daughter of Janaka, deemed that 'she 
is mine,' as he has gone under the sway of the Terminator. [3-55-37]



SARGA 56
------------------------------

[Text] Seetha reprimands Ravana in saying that her unswerving devotion to Rama will not permit her to be dominated 
by anyone. She gives word-by-word replies to all that is prattled by Ravana in earlier chapter. A discussion 
about Seetha's stance and stability is given in the endnote of this chapter.

Shlok 1: She that Vaidehi who is haggard by anguish boldly spoke to Ravana when he addressed her in that way, 
duly placing a blade of straw in between herself and Ravana. [3-56-1]

[Commentary] The place of conversation is a speckles palace and then where from a blade of straw is available to 
Seetha to place in between them - is the question. It is adjusted by saying that a straw blade stuck 
to her sari, which she removed and placed in between. Has she searched whole of sari, inch by inch, 
for a blade of straw that too to talk to a debased character - is its counter-question. Anyway she treated 
Ravana just as a worthless straw - is another viewpoint. Either way, 'husband-devout' wives do not chat 
with 'the other' males without making an improvised screen in between, may it be a half-veil, a door, 
or any other item that prevent the vilely ogles of others.

[Commentary] She is also said to be talking 'boldly...' where this boldness is the derivative of her self-assured 
'husband-devoutness.' When this boldness is there why she is emaciated through sadness - is the collateral 
question. For this, it is said that her wailing is not for herself, but for her separation from Rama, 
coupled with her thinking about Rama's miseries in forest, besides, due to the ambiguity about Lakshmana's 
meeting with Rama or otherwise.

[Commentary] Tilaka says, 'Seetha is aware of the curse of Ravana that his heads get splintered into pieces if he 
makes advances to any female without her consent, hence Seetha is talking fearlessly. And if Ravana 
tries to make any further advances, Seetha is ready to disappear, as is the practice with gods, or to 
become an untouchable entity, like a hologram...' But this is negated, taking Seetha as a human level 
entity rather than an incarnation, saying that 'human Seetha is unaware of Ravana himself, thus her 
becoming aware of his curse is untenable...' Maybe, Goddess Lakshmi or Maya Seetha is aware of that 
curse of Ravana.

Shlok 2: "He whose son is Raghava, is a resolute king known as Dasharatha. That king is a kingly rampart for 
righteousness, a kingpin abiding in forthrightness and thereby his kingliness is well renowned in all 
worlds, and my husband Rama is such a king's son. [3-56-2]

[Commentary] The word used setu also means a 'bridge' apart from a rampart. Thus Dasharatha is not only 
a rampart 'a defensive wall with a broad top and usu. a stone parapet...' for the defence of dharma 
from its mismanagement, but he is also the bridge between a dharma and dharma. Thus 
this bridge called Dasharatha enables anyone to crossover it towards dharma. That bridge called 
Dasharatha allowed Rama to cross and to reach forests for the annihilation of demons.

[Commentary] Therefore, Seetha is saying 'being such a righteous king's daughter-in-law, I cannot bring blemish to 
my in-laws, or to their dynasty in surrendering to you... furthermore, my husband is the one from such 
a dynasty who never tolerates unrighteousness...'

[Commentary] And by taking the name of Dasharatha, where dasha ratha 'ten way charioteer, or charioteer 
of ten chariots...' she is explaining 'my father-in-law chariots his one chariot in ten ways, whereas 
you can steer only one in one way, called lust... my father-in-law chariots ten chariots in a single 
instance, whereas you can handle only one, at any given time besides being dependent on the capability 
of auto-propelling Pushpaka aircraft, rather than on your own steersman's capability...

Shlok 3: "Such a Dasharatha's son who is virtue-souled one, who is highly renowned in all the three worlds for 
his ambidexterity and perspicacity, and who is known as Rama is my husband and a god to me. [3-56-3]

[Commentary] Annex: 'And he is named as Rama because he causes rejoice in one and all, thus he is well renowned in 
all worlds, unlike you who are named as Ravana, meaning that 'the one who makes one and all rueful...' 
thus you are also well renowned in the worlds, but by your notoriety. On the other hand Rama is virtue-souled, 
unlike you a virtueless, meritless and lawless knave... and his ambidexterity contrasts with your guile-handedness, 
while his perceptiveness with your purblindness of the proximate problem of yours... such a husband's 
wife as I am, how do you think that I on my own get estranged from such a godlike husband of mine, unrighteously...

Shlok 4: "He who took birth in Ikshvaku's dynasty is a great-resplendent one with his shoulders like those of 
a lion, and who comes here along with similarly lion-shouldered and nearly great-resplendent brother 
of his, namely Lakshmana, to take your lives away. Such Rama is my husband. [3-56-4]

[Commentary] Annex: Ravana asked Seetha at 3-55-21 'what can you achieve with that dethroned, hapless, seer, vagrant 
Rama and who is short-lived, for after all, he is a human with littlest vitality?' Thus belittling Rama's 
possessions in the shape of palaces, riches and kingdoms. For that Seetha is now saying that Rama does 
not possess anything, but the whole world is possessed of him. saha lakshmaNa= sa ha lakshmaNa ; 
cihnaa naamno saha lakshmii ke saumitrau saa rasa striyaam 'Supreme Person's possession is the 
eternal opulence of the Universe...' para brahma mantraNayo 'one achievable by constant meditation 
upon Him alone...' To such Rama now adjoined is Lakshmana, the personified prosperity. As such, that 
Supreme Splendour has taken incarnation as Rama because of the curse of Anaranya. Thus, Seetha took 
the name of Ikshvaku dynasty.

[Commentary] The curse of Anaranya: Anaranya is the ancestor of Rama in Ikshvaku dynasty. His son is Haryashva, a 
grandparent of Rama. When Ravana subjugated Anaranya, dying Anaranya curses Ravana to die at the hands 
of his great-grandson Rama in later generations.

[Commentary] 'Such Ikshvaku will now come along with prosperous Lakshmana not only to belittle your opulence of falsity, 
but also to terminate such a vainglorious mischief... thus foxlike creatures like you cannot dare a 
lion, for he is lion-shouldered... and because you foxed Rama you are still alive, otherwise...' - continuation 
with next verse.

Shlok 5: "Had I been forcibly humiliated by you in the presence of Rama, you too would have been killed by Rama 
in combat and by now you too would be sprawling on earth, as with Khara in Janasthaana, but you foxed 
him. However, such Rama is my husband. [3-56-5]

Shlok 6: "Those demons who are spoken of you to be with ghastly forms and gruelling power, they all will become 
formless and powerless in face of Raghava, as with all snakes becoming non-poisonous earthworms in the 
face of Garuda, the Divine Eagle. Such Rama is my husband. [3-56-6]

[Commentary] Annex: 'You said that you have millions and millions of ghastly demons... but where are they, in the 
backyard of your house and behind your back? None has surfaced so far to confront my husband, for they 
are nothing but your kitchenware... and thus you are a gehe shuuraH 'a champion in your own 
home... a paper tiger...' boastful of your paper-thin-tigerish-ness before me, a solitary woman... thus 
you and your forces will be rendered ineffectual the minute you confront my husband...'

Shlok 7: "Those gilded arrows of Rama unloosened directly and unswervingly from his bowstring will utterly batter 
your body, as the waves of River Ganga will be battering that river's riverbanks. Such Rama is my husband. 
[3-56-7]

[Commentary] Annex: 'What if Rama is dethroned or enthroned? He is not a 'hapless' person as observed by you, but 
he solitarily depends upon his self-confidence and a pair of skilful arms

Shlok 8: "Even if you are unkillable either by gods or by demons, you Ravana, you will not be disenthralled by 
Rama while you are alive, for you hatched a very great animosity in him against you. [3-56-8]

[Commentary] Annex: 'Maybe god or demons or others, other than humans, cannot kill you... why the humans were slighted 
by you as your killing agents at the time of your seeking boons from Brahma, or at least at the time 
of my abduction why humans are disregarded... hence, that heedlessness alone becomes the very cause 
for your self-ruination...'

Shlok 9: "That mighty Rama will become the terminator of the vestige of your life, and as with an animal fastened 
to the stake of sacrifice your life too will become irretrievable. [3-56-9]

[Commentary] Annex: 'Even the beasts like cattle and goats when herded towards a slaughterhouse they will be apprehensively 
fearsome and walk closely and snugly, for they know not what will become of them... and for your part, 
your intellect is far too low than that of a beastie bovine... and you say vaingloriously that everything 
in every world fears you... firstly you fear for yourself as an animal tied to a stake...

[Commentary] 'Rama's life itself is yaj~na 'a sacrificial ritual...' his actions are ritualistic performances... 
in which he sacrifices a dharma for the sake of dharma even by sacrificing his own 
comforts... and you said of him as a 'vagrant...' yes, his yaj~na is to be performed not by 
sitting in some hall of ritual, but meandering vagrantly... because entire earth is his hall of ritual... 
and now, you as a sacrificial beast are fastened to the stake of sacrifice by a rope called Seetha, 
and you be ready awaiting for your slaughter in that raama yaj~na

Shlok 10: "If he that Rama glances you with his rancour-torched eyes, you demon, you will be completely burnt 
down now itself, as with Love-god burnt down by Furious Shiva. [3-56-10]

[Commentary] Annex: 'exacting eroticism is an inexcusable impasse... did you not learn this lesson from the legend 
of your iSTa daiva 'most cherished god...' God Shiva, who burnt down the Love-god... and if there is 
any thinly separated state between love and lust, how then will you be unburnt by the furious glances 
of Rama for your lustfulness...

Shlok 11: "He that Rama who hurls down the moon from skies onto earth, or else extirpates it if need be, or even 
desiccates an ocean, he alone rescues Seetha from here. [3-56-11]

[Commentary] Annex: 'You need not sit back gleefully thinking that none can cross over an ocean and come thither, 
presuming that 'a hundred-yojana ocean roundly enshrouds this Lanka...' Rama can dehydrate any ocean 
of any size in its entirety... thus he just walk on its sands in commissioning his mission...

Shlok 12: "Gone is your liveability, gone is your prosperity, gone is your vivacity, and gone is your faculty. 
Thus Lanka is widowed by a single deed of yours. [3-56-12]

[Commentary] Annex: 'as such, you yourself cannot be on the throne of Lanka since her widowhood is admonished by 
your single act of touching 'other man's wife' that is me, and in abducting me... wherewith you daydream 
and daresay to me 'you rule over this very great empire of Lanka as empress of Lanka...'

Shlok 13: "In forest you have separated me from the propinquity of my husband, which diabolic deed of yours will 
not result in any ultimate happiness for you. [3-56-13]

[Commentary] Annex: you said to me, 'of what use is your thinking conversely about that long-lost Rama...' what else 
am I to do, for I am diabolically dragged away from him by you, as such I am, I am now contemplating 
upon that Rama alone to come here to handover 'a fruit of unhappiness' to you as a barter for my release...'

Shlok 14: "In fact, that great-resplendent husband of mine, Rama, is still residing in the eremitical Dandaka 
forest, bravely hinging on to his own valour, in tandem only with my brother-in-law. [3-56-14]

[Commentary] Annex: 'you said that you do not envisage 'him who can lead me back with his valour...' but my husband 
is still there in Dandaka along with his brother, both in tandem only with God Almighty, whose biting 
bravery and venomous valour are yet to be tasted by you... and if you too are brave enough, confront 
him to know whether I am winnable or otherwise...'

Shlok 15: "With storms of his arrows in a given combat my husband will dislodge arrogance, insolence, puissance, 
like that impudence from every limb of yours. [3-56-15]

[Commentary] Annex: 'for yours is only bodily might as you have said 'I behold none matchable to my vitality...' 
and no spiritual or ethical, or whatsoever merits abide in you... thus, should you confront an ethical 
and scrupulous combatant, evanished are your bodily vanities...'

Shlok 16: "As and when ruination of created beings manifests actuated by Time, then all of them will place their 
behaviour in endangerment, as they have gone under the control of End-Time. [3-56-16]

[Commentary] Annex: 'you said to me that 'by your damnable dwelling in forests, bygone is your bad-luck which you 
misdealt in bygone times...' and I agree for that assertion of yours as my damnable bad-luck is nearing 
its completion, but your damnable, ill-lucky, self-ruinous time as started, and hence you are placing 
your behaviour in endangerment, by this quirkish act of abducting me...'

Shlok 17: "This is that time which has bechanced on you owing to your molesting me, you basely demon, by which 
time-factor yourself, all of your demons, and even all of your queens in the Chambers of Queens will 
be devastated. [3-56-17]

[Commentary] Annex: You said that I will become an empress among all females you brought. I need not become an empress 
for the 'countless females of finest fabric you amassed...' Because all those females have yielded themselves 
to you, and they are going to be devastated and evanished along with their Chambers of Queens, which 
chambers you endowed to them as gifts. But Rama will rescue others who are still captivated yet reticent. 
Where is the question of my becoming an empress of dead souls?

Shlok 18: "It is impossible for a profaner to heavily tread on the Altar of Fire amidst a Ritual Hall surrounded 
by oblational vessels, further sanctified by Vedic hymns. [3-56-18]

[Commentary] Annex: 'Liken me to that Altar of Fire, centrally located in the ritual hall of Rama, namely the whole 
earth, and liken the oblational receptacles to nature's bounties like lakes, rivers, mountains, trees, 
and liken the offerings to flowers, fruits, and waters, and liken Vedic sound to the background drone 
of nature... and every bit of it is sanctified by all the hymns of Veda-s, as all Veda-s glorify them, 
the components of nature alone... and you profaner... it is impossible for you tread on this Fire Altar, 
that is me, blasphemously...'

[Commentary] This expression caNDaal has its own impact. Though this is amplified elsewhere it is reiterated 
here also. The nomenclature of caNDaal is not the present day 'untouchable' 'outcaste' or a 
'pariah' etc., because he is also a member and an important functionary in Hindu system of castes. The 
analogy is between the Vedic-scholar and profaner, [meaning: one who is not initiated into religious 
rites or any esoteric knowledge...] and between the Altar of Fire and Fire of Pyre, and between the 
Vedic Ritual and Funeral Rites, both involving Vedic-hymns. A Vedic scholar may perhaps conduct a
yaj~na but he is no authority to conduct antya kriya 'funerals' till its end. At best, 
a priest's function is until the lighting of the pyre, and even perhaps until kapaala moksha 
'breakage of cranium...' and from then on it is the function of this caNDaal to take care of 
the corpse consigned to fire and for its complete cremation, since leaving half burnt corpse to vultures 
and foxes or wolves, is sinning. Thus, if a Vedic scholar conducts jaata aadi kriyaaH 'rites 
from birth onwards...' as an initiator, whereas a caNDaal conducts antya, uttara kriyaaH 
'rites of death afterwards...' as a terminator. Thus, Ravana being a Vedic scholar is now conducting 
himself as a self-cremator.

Shlok 19: "Likewise, I am the solemnly pledged legitimate wife of one who steadied himself in righteousness, and 
such as I am, you basely demon, it is impossible for you trespasser to touch me even. [3-56-19]

Shlok 20: "How a she-swan ever frolicking with majestic swans in bunches of lotuses can leer at a water-crow sneaking 
in a bunch of grass? [3-56-20]

Shlok 21- 22a: "Oh, demon, you may either trammel or vandalise this inertial body of mine. I claim neither this body 
nor life of mine as my own. But I am intolerant to bear with any disrepute on this earth." Thus Seetha 
castigated Ravana. [3-56-21, 22a]

[Commentary] Annex: 'my father endowed me to Rama bodily in kanyaa daana 'bride betrothal...' and I soulfully 
resigned my soul, let alone my life, unto that Rama by my vara sviikaara, paaNi grahaNa... 
'marriage...' as such I cannot reclaim my body and soul from Rama for placement in other's unworthy 
hands... thereby it is up Rama to win back his wife, or it is up to you to tangle, mangle, and wrangle 
with these ideas...'

[Commentary] Nobility is nobler than life. Hence, it is to be protected even at the cost of one's own life... 
anena praaNa parityaagena api loka apavaada pariharaNa puurvakam yashaH samrakShNiiyam iti suucitam 
- tathaa ca raghu vamshe kaalidaasaH - api sva dehaat kim uta indriya arthaat yashodhaanaanam hi yasho 
gariiyaH - dk

Shlok 22b- 23a: Vaidehi on speaking those highly caustic words angrily to Ravana in this way, she that Maithili spoke 
no more in that matter. [3-56-22b, 23a]

Shlok 23b- 24a: On hearing Seetha's scathing and hair-raising censures, then Ravana retorted with these intimidatory 
chides. [3-56-23b, 24a]

Shlok 24b- 25: "Oh, angry lady Maithili, listen to my words. A period of twelve months is given to you. And oh, smiley 
smiler, if you do not come nigh of me within that period, then the cooks will slice you to pieces for 
the purpose of a morning meal." [3-56-24b, 25]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: Ravana the devotee is saying: 'I will wait for a period of twelve months... and if 
I am na abhyeSi 'unblessed...' tataH tvaam uddishya 'then, on your account...' 
praataH 'morning, next morning after twelve month period...' aashaa artham 'for the purpose 
of crows, eagles and vultures in direction, quarters...' suudaaH 'cooks...' maam Chesyanti 
'me, they slice to pieces...' mat aaj~nayaa, iti shesaH 'by my order, thus ellipted...'

[Commentary] 'I will wait for a period of twelve months... and if I am unblessed even by that time, by my order my 
cooks will slice me to pieces for the morning meal of vultures in all the directions of compass, as 
a kind of self-immolation by getting sliced to pieces as I will become unworthy for your grace...' Tiirtha.

[Commentary] If one king conquers another and lay seize to queens, a twelve month time is given to the defeated king 
to regain his captivated queens, by making another round of combat. If the defeated king is unable to 
do so, or reluctant to do so, the captivated queens of the defeated king automatically belong to the 
conquering king after twelve months, raja niita - shaanti parva - Maha Bharata.

Shlok 26: Thus on saying those harsh words, Ravana, the one who makes his enemies to bewail, and who is now infuriated 
said this sentence to the guarding demonesses. [3-56-26]

Shlok 27: "Oh, gnarled demonesses of grisly mien and devourers of meat and blood, you have to indeed remove her 
pride immediately. [3-56-27]

[Commentary] dhvani/innuendo: 'Oh, demonesses you now immediately become a+ vikR^itaa 'not, ghastly, not 
gnarled...' darpam vinaa 'your pride, without...' asyaat samiipe 'in her proximity, 
in her audience...' iSyadhvam 'be servitors...'

[Commentary] 'Oh, demonesses of gnarled grisly mien and devourers of meat and blood, now you immediately become presentable, 
casting off your gnarled and ghastly appearances... and without your personal pride be in her servitude 
as servitors in her audience... for she is my Goddess Lakshmi...'

Shlok 28: Just by that order of Ravana those demonesses of grotesque and ugly appearance have obediently made 
palm-fold to him and encircled Maithili. [3-56-28]

Shlok 29: That king Ravana paced in an earth-shattering manner as though to cleave it and clearly said this to 
those demonesses with ghastly look. [3-56-29]

Shlok 30: "Let this Maithili be taken to the centre of Ashoka gardens, where you all shall blockade and guard 
her stealthily. [3-56-30]

Shlok 31: "You threaten her with dreadful admonitions and again speaking imploringly you all have to bring her 
under control, as a wild she-elephant of age will be brought under control. [3-56-31]

[Commentary] Annex: Ravana the devotee's the caution is: vinaa tarjaniaH 'without threats, tame her; or
tarjanaiH vinaa ghoraiH where vinaa 'without...' is ellipted by commentators and said 
'threats without dreadfulness...

[Commentary] 'You as demons are already habituated to threat sages and saints till their death... but, mind it... 
just threaten Maithili till threat-tolerability... do not overdo it, lest she may die of threats... 
again brainwash her with good words of me and my generosity... if Maithili is dead at your hands deem 
that you and your families are effaced... for I cherish Maithili to live...'

Shlok 32- 33: When Ravana has clearly ordered, those demonesses on their part took Maithili to Ashoka garden. That 
Ashoka gardens are surrounded with trees that yield fruits to every savour, and now they are diversely 
flowered and fruited. Further, those gardens are highly adored by all-time lusty birds. [3-56-32, 33]

Shlok 34: But she that Janaka's daughter Maithili whose body is with a coverall of anguish, further on obtaining 
the control of demonesses, she is as good as a she-deer under the coverall of tigresses. [3-56-34]

Shlok 35: Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, who is already consumed by utmost agony has not obtained any placidity 
now as with a she-deer bound by tether - where timorousness is common to both. [3-56-35]

Shlok 36: Maithili knows no peace when the bizarre-eyed demonesses have highly intimidated her, and by shut-seeing 
those demonesses her reminiscences went over to her dear husband and about her brother-in-law Lakshmana 
too, and when she felt about the improbability of their coming here, she is distraught with alarm and 
anguish, and then she swooned. [3-56-36]

[Commentary] Is Seetha really the Goddess Lakshmi? This question 
is often raised and answered by commentators. Ravana kidnapped umpteen numbers of beautiful women and 
goddess, but why his dialogues with Seetha are given many shades of meanings by all most all commentators. 
Is this for proving Ravana as devotee or else to prove that Seetha is not a human but Goddess Lakshmi 
- is the collateral objection. Apparently, Seetha is behaving like a normal woman but latently her speeches, 
verbiage, or the words put by Valmiki on her tongue, indicate that she is an all-powerful enigma... 
without saying who she is.

[Commentary] If she is an incarnation of Goddess Lakshmi how 
then can Ravana lift her up and carry this far - is the next dilemma, because Ravana's strength becomes 
useless to lift up Lakshmana who swooned on the battlefield when Ravana used Shakti missile. In Yuddha 
Kaanda Ch. 59 verse 111 it is said: himavaan 
mandaro meroH trai lokyam vaa saha amaraiH | shakyam bhujaabhyaam uddhartum na shakyo bharata anujaH

[Commentary] 'Ravana may have lifted Mt. Himavan, 
Mt. Mandara, Mt. Meru or all the three worlds along with all gods, but he could not lift up Bharata's 
brother Lakshmana with both of his shoulders...'

[Commentary] Ravana wanted to distance fiercer Lakshmana from 
Rama so that Rama's intensity of warring lessens. Then an episode of this lifting occurs and Hanuma 
on seeing this comes to Ravana and hits Ravana with fist, by which Ravana falls distantly with blood 
effusing from eyes, ears, and mouth. Then Hanuma easily lifts up Lakshmana and takes him to Rama. A 
man in swoon will not weigh differently to two different lifters. How then Ravana could not lift Lakshmana, 
which is not at all a great feat to Hanuma? For this the very next verse 112 gives a reply saying that:

[Commentary] 'even if Lakshmana is hit by Shakti 
missile of Brahma, he is conscious of himself as an unimaginable entity of God Vishnu, so Ravana could 
not lift Lakshmana. Whereas Hanuma happened to be a true devotee of God Almighty, he could easily lift 
Lakshmana...'

[Commentary] Then the original topic of Ravana's lifting and 
carrying off Seetha comes to fore. She is also another unimaginable entity of Supreme Person. How then 
can Ravana lift her? For this it is said that Seetha allowed herself to be carried off by Ravana as 
she pledged in the incarnation of Vedavati.

[Commentary] The legend goes on to say that Vedavati is the 
brainchild of a sage called Kushadhwaja, and he decides to give Vedavati only to Vishnu in marriage. 
But it is an unfulfilled desire in his lifetime. Then Vedavati starts a rigorous penance to achieve 
her father's wish. When she is at the culmination point of her penance, Ravana passing that way in skyway 
sees this beautiful lady, nears, and disturbs her penance. Vedavati coming out of her meditation curses 
Ravana saying that she will reincarnate herself to destroy Ravana and his entire dynasty. Then she causes 
a yogic fire and immolates herself in it. Ravana took this as prattle by a woman-hermit, dismisses that 
curse, and conveniently forgets it.

[Commentary] Later, Ravana being an ardent devotee of Shiva, 
on one day when he enters a lake to get lotuses for his daily worship of Shiva, and finds among lotuses 
a baby in a lotus. He brings that lotus and the baby to his palace, in all his fondness for children. 
But his empress Mandodari doubts the arrival of this baby in lotus and recognises that baby as Goddess 
Lakshmi. They consult their teachers about that baby's arrival. Those teachers, priests and pundits 
advise to get rid of this baby immediately, for she is Vedavati, arrived here only to end Ravana and 
his dynasty. Then Mandodari orders the servants to carry away this baby in a casket, and bury it.

[Commentary] Empress Mandodari further curses that girl saying: 
'this faithless girl [for Wealth has no faithfulness, and this girl is recognised as Goddess Lakshmi 
- presiding deity of Wealth,] will thrive only in a house, where the householder has his senses conquered, 
and who being an emperor lives like a perfect hermit, and who though wealthy and supreme by himself, 
will care nothing for the riches but view whole of the world and people as his own soul, with an impartial 
attitude...' Mandodari thought that such a person is an impossibility to take birth in this mortal world, 
and thus presumed this curse to be twisty. But there is King Janaka who has all these attributes. A 
king without ego, wealthy one living simple, childless but yet does not crave for children, like King 
Dasharatha. Hence, he is called raajarshi a saintly king. While King Janaka 
was about to perform a Vedic ritual, he had to till some piece of land as a ceremonial act to commence 
that ritual. Then this casket with the baby is touched to the blade at the end of plough-beam and that 
plough halted. The attendants dug up that area only to find this casket with baby. The childless Janaka 
takes the baby into his arms and names her as 'Seetha...' where Seetha in Sanskrit means 'furrow.' This 
is as per aananda raamaayaNa Thus, Goddess Lakshmi became Vedavati and 
Vedavati became Seetha of Ramayana, as such Valmiki calls his Ramayana siithaayaH 
charitam mahaan...

[Commentary] Then another counter objection - it is all correct 
to say that all puraaNaa-s say that these characters in Ramayana as gods 
and goddesses, as Vishnu Puraana says raaghavatve havat siitaa rukmiNii kR^iSNa 
jananii. But does Valmiki say it in his epic? For this it is answered, though it is not said 
explicitly there are many instances indicating towards this divinity of Seetha. Seetha asks Fire-god 
to become cool for Hanuma, when his tail is burnt saying siito bhava hanumataa 
and likewise she could have said hato bhava raavaNa 'dead you are Ravana...' 
But she does not say so for, because Rama has to undertake that process of elimination of vice called 
Ravana. As Seetha said in Sundara Kanda Ch. 22, verse 20:
a sandeshaat 
tu raamasya tapasaH ca anupaalanaat | na tvaam kurmi dashagriiva bhasma bhasmaarha tejasaa ||

[Commentary] 'As I have no indication from 
Rama to burn you down, nor do I wish to waste my ascetic power, therefore I do not burn you to ashes, 
though you are worthy to become a mound of ash...'na apahartum aham shkyaa tvayaa raamasya dhiimataH | vidhiH tava vadha arthaaya vihito na atra samshayaH ||

[Commentary] 'I am un-seizable for [any] as 
I am the wife of bold Rama, but it happened so, for you are fated to doom [you could seize me...] undoubtedly...'

[Commentary] Again in 
Yuddha Kanda Brahma in eulogising Rama for eliminating Ravana says in Ch. 117, verse 28:
siitaa lakshmiiH bhavaan viSNuH... 'Seetha is Lakshmi and you are Vishnu...' 
Like this, there are many bits and pieces of information to establish her as an incarnate of Vedavati 
alias Goddess Lakshmi. Govindaraja.

[Commentary] Then why she and Rama behaved 
like humans in their wailing, moaning, and bawling is again a secondary query. This is according to
loka riiti, laukika vidhaana 'humanly nature, behaviour in human world...' 
Though this humanly behaviour is not innate trait as Rama says aatmaanam aham 
maanuSam manye 'I for myself confess to be human...' Hence this humanly wailing and bawling are 
due to an adopted human behaviour, where incarnation itself is an adaptation.

[Commentary] Their humanly behaviour 
is to show themselves as one with the humans, asking humans to undergo these series of sufferings to 
eliminate unrighteousness, either in the society or within themselves. Besides, their mission is to 
make believe Ravana that they are just humans, as Ravana is killable by humans and monkeys, but not 
to hoodwink readers, the adherents or all of us put together. Maheshvara Tiirtha.

[Commentary] This incarceration of Seetha 
in Ashoka gardens is viewed as the incarceration of the innate soul in birthed being's body. The release 
from that body, namely moksha is achievable only when that being wants 
a perfect release by transcending the threefold nature consisting of sattva, rajas, 
tamo guNaaH 'purity, activity and stolidity...' and with an unswerving devotion to the Supreme 
as said in Gita, 14-26: maam 
ca yo avyabhicaareNa bhakti yogena sevate | sa guNaan samatiitya etaan brahma bhuuya kalpate ||

[Commentary] 'And such- / With single, fervent faith adoring 
Me, / Passing beyond the Qualities, conforms / To Brahma, and attains Me!' - Sir Edwin Arnold.

[Commentary] God Almighty is said to 
be masculine single, the rest of the universe is taken as feminine, as said in Vishnu Puraana:
sa eva vaasudevo ayam saakShaat puruSha ucyate | strii praayam etat sarvam jagat brahma purassaram || 
Then the way the innate soul, called Seetha, is incarcerated is, when she had no help of the Supreme 
or the Adherent of the Supreme, [Rama and Lakshmana.] Then the Decahedral demon [the demon called Ten 
Motor Senses,] came and captured the Soul, called Seetha and incarcerated that soul in Lanka. The syllable 
'lam' in the word Lanka is lam - biijaakshara which stands for earth, and 
because body is earthly, lascivious and carnal, the soul enters that body by its bondage. If that soul 
again tries for a final release, that soul shall seek the Ultimate as said in the verse of Gita, quoted 
above.

[Commentary] There is no instance to quote that Rama or Seetha have performed 
some miracles, special effects or any other optical works... perhaps due to lack of any FX studio or 
something like that, or due to their humanly behaviour. This wizardry is shown by demons and monkeys 
but not by mannish Rama or womanish Seetha. Yet Seetha is held more enigmatic than Rama. If she is not 
an enigma how she footslogged miles and miles in forests without hiring a taxi, and how she came out 
of blazing fire when she performed self-immolation after Great War? These are but two questions among 
many. Because these questions are never-ending and more enigmatic, because we think that we have deciphered 
what Rama is, it is better retain Seetha as an undecipherable enigma.



SARGA 57
------------------------------

[Text] Rama meets Lakshmana while returning to hermitage after killing the deer demon Maareecha. He also confronts 
some ill omens and worries why Lakshmana left Seetha alone and came to him, sad facedly.

Shlok 1: Rama on killing that demon Maareecha, who is a guise changer at his wish and who moved about in the 
guise of a deer, instantly started to return on the trail by which he trailed after that deer-demon. 
[3-57-1]

Shlok 2: While Rama is anxiously hurrying to see Maithili, then a brutish voiced jackal deafeningly howled at 
his behind. [3-57-2]

Shlok 3: On hearing that threatening and hair-raising howl of jackal Rama is overly threatened just by the tone 
of fox in which it is foreboding, inasmuch as the forbidding intoning of Maareecha. [3-57-3]

Shlok 4: "Huh! As to how this jackal has howled I deem that as inauspicious. As yet undevoured by demons would 
Vaidehi be safe? [3-57-4]

Shlok 5- 6: "On knowing the nature of my voice Maareecha in the semblance of a deer yelled out mimicking my voice. 
If Lakshmana listens that voice, recognising it as my voice he will instantly rush to my near. Else 
if Maithili listens, she will hasten him to go over here and Soumitri instantly rushes here leaving 
her off. [3-57-5, 6]

Shlok 7- 8: "As could be seen from Maareecha's becoming a Golden Deer only to sidetrack and take me away from hermitage, 
his becoming a demon when hit with an arrow, and his shouting words indeed like, 'ha, Lakshmana, ha, 
Seetha, I am killed,' the demons are collectively intending to do away with Seetha. It is certain. [3-57-7, 
8]

Shlok 9- 10a: "Whether there will be safety in forest for those two in my absence, or not, is my doubt. Owing to my 
devastating Janasthaana I have become a harboured grudge for demons, am not I! As such, foretokens are 
appearing now, severely and severally." Thus Rama's thoughts have sprinted. [3-57-9, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11: When that soulful Rama has heard the whistle of jackal while returning, he persistently thought in this 
way about his detour caused by demon in the disguise of a deer, thus he speedily advanced towards his 
hermitage. [3-57-10b, 11]

Shlok 12: Raghava came to Janasthaana doubting overly, and the animals and birds of Janasthaana which look doleful 
have neared him whose heart has become doleful. [3-57-12]

Shlok 13: Those doleful animals and birds moving in circumambulations from the left side to right of that noble-souled 
Rama they let off frightening shrieks, and then observing those highly forbidding foretokens Rama returned 
to his own hermitage hastily and hurriedly. [3-57-13]

[Commentary] It is ill-omened if the animals or birds move round from one's left to right side. 
anena 
mR^iga pakShiNaam apradakShiNa gamanam ashubhakaram iti uktyaa pradakShiNa gamanam shubhakaram iti suucitam 
- mR^igaa vihangaaH ca gataaH pradakShiNam mahiibhR^itaam kaankShita kaarya siddhaye | ratnamaala - 
dk

Shlok 14- 15a: Then Rama saw Lakshmana coming towards him with a lacklustre face, and then Lakshmana, who is melancholic 
and anguishing in his divergence from Seetha, met Rama not a long-way-off, where Rama is a similar partaker 
in melancholy and anguishing by way of his convergence upon ill-omens. [3-57-14, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: On seeing Lakshmana who has arrived at this place leaving off Seetha in a forest that is desolate, more 
so an adorable forest for demons, Rama reproached him as his elder brother. [3-57-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: Taking Lakshmana's left hand into his, Rama, the descendent of Raghu, alike a bewailer spoke this brusque 
speech that has a mellowly fruition in future. [3-57-16b, 17a]

[Commentary] This statement obtains two shades of meaning. One, the speech of Rama in reproaching Lakshmana though 
appear to be brusque, latently it is congratulatory to Lakshmana, to make happen the abduction of Seetha 
firstly, and thereby the ultimate elimination of Ravana. Two, he scolded Lakshmana prima facie for leaving 
Seetha, but on realising that he is not at fault, his speech is softened.

Shlok 17b- 18a: "You have done a deplorable deed in coming here forsaking Seetha. Now, oh, gentle Lakshmana, are we 
somewhat safe, or everything has already gone astray now itself, or what. [3-57-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19: "Oh, brave one, according to these many inauspicious forebodings that have manifested themselves to 
me, we might have lost Janaka's daughter Seetha, or the forest ranging demons might have devoured her, 
or else they might have kidnapped her, I am doubtless about it. [3-57-18b, 19]

Shlok 20: "Oh, tigerly-man Lakshmana, I wonder whether we can at least make out the daughter of Janaka Seetha 
in her intactness and aliveness. [3-57-20]

Shlok 21: "On observing these mobs of deer, this jackal, also even these birds which are voicing noisily facing 
the direction lit by the sun, oh, great-mighty Lakshmana, can we presume that there will be safety to 
that princes Seetha? [3-57-21]

Shlok 22: "This very demon in his likeness to a deer led me on and led me off distantly as I was indeed following 
him, and by an intense effort somehow he was killed, and when dying he transfigured into a demon. [3-57-22]

Shlok 23: "Now even my heart is woeful and I am woebegone, my left eye is also fluttering erratically, oh, Lakshmana, 
no doubt Seetha is not there in hermitage, maybe she is whisked away, or, wiped out, or, wandering around 
on a wrong way. [3-57-23]

[Commentary] The flutter of the left eye to males is ill-omened.
anena 
puruShasya manaso asantoSho vaama netra sphuraNam ashubha suucakam iti uktyaa dakShiNa netra sphuraNam 
manaH santoShaH ca shubha kara iti suucitam | tathaa ca raghu vamshe kaalidaasaH - tasyaam raghoH suunu 
rupaa sthitaayaam vR^iNiita vaa neti samaakulo aabhuut | vaametaraH samshayam asya baahuH keyuura bandhhocHravasito 
nunoda || - dk



SARGA 58
------------------------------

[Text] Rama is anguished for Seetha's aloneness and it is expressed in his chastening Lakshmana. Rama asks 
him as to why he left Seetha unguarded in the lonely forest. Rama rushes rapidly to hermitage thinking 
and talking that rapidly to Lakshmana about Seetha, and on arriving he finds vacuity in hermitage and 
then he is thrown in throes of despair.

Shlok 1: On seeing dreary Lakshmana coming into the void of forest devoid of Vaidehi, then the virtue-souled 
Rama, the son of Dasharatha, has asked him impatiently. [3-58-1]

Shlok 2: "She who has come in tow with me to Dandaka forest when I started for peregrination, whom you have now 
deserted and came here, oh, Lakshmana, she that Vaidehi, where is she? [3-58-2]

Shlok 3: "When I have become forlorn with the forfeiture of my kingdom and when I was rushing for Dandaka forest 
she stood with me as a partaker in my woes. She that comely Vaidehi, where is she? [3-58-3]

Shlok 4: "Without whom I am disinclined to live even for a moment, oh, valiant one, such a Seetha who in simile 
is like the daughter of deities and who is my life-force, where is she? [3-58-4]

Shlok 5: "I am unambitious for the rulership either on heavens or on the earth, oh, Lakshmana, without the daughter 
of Janaka whose aspect glisters like gold. [3-58-5]

Shlok 6: "Vaidehi who is dearer to me than my lives, will she be alive somehow! Oh, valiant Lakshmana, this peregrination 
of mine, will it not become futile, someway! [3-58-6]

[Commentary] Annex: I neither can live devoid of Seetha, nor can complete the pledge of fourteen-year period of forest 
trek for ultimate annihilation of Ravana. If Seetha is dead I am also dead. Then I have live to fulfil 
the pledge. But when I am dead I will become a killer of my own pledge than my own body. If Seetha is 
no more what happens to her abduction, Ravana's elimination, and my pledge to gods and my incarnation...

Shlok 7: "When I am dead for the sake of Seetha and when you get back to Ayodhya lonesomely, and when Kaikeyi's 
wishes are accomplished thus, oh, Soumitri, will she be comfortable, somewhat! [3-58-7]

Shlok 8: "Kaikeyi is with her son, with a kingdom, and further her 'purposes are achieved,' oh, gentle Lakshmana, 
and because of the death of her son will my austerely mother Kausalya humbly get into the servitude 
of Kaikeyi, anyhow! [3-58-8]

Shlok 9: "I wish to get at the hermitage again if only that Vaidehi of good-conduct is alive in hermitage, else, 
oh, Lakshmana, if death has already conducted her out of hermitage I too will give up my lives here 
itself. [3-58-9]

Shlok 10: "If Seetha, the princess from Videha, does not chat with me as before smiling gleefully on my arrival 
at the hermitage, oh, Lakshmana, I really breath my last. [3-58-10]

Shlok 11: "Say Lakshmana, whether that pietistic Vaidehi is alive or not? Or, on your becoming unmindful of your 
guard is she consumed by demons, either? [3-58-11]

Shlok 12: "She who is softish by her nature and youngish by her age has never noticed the despair of separation 
from me, and now by my dissociation she will be despairing brokenheartedly, so it seems. [3-58-12]

Shlok 13: "That impostor and highly impudent demon Maareecha who shouted loudly as, 'oh, Lakshmana,' might have 
caused fear even in you in everyway. [3-58-13]

[Commentary] Annex: 'you yourself have said that the Golden Deer is demon Maareecha, but I went after to eliminate 
the very same demon... then, how you are dismayed to hear a trickster's mimicking my voice and came 
rushing fearfully, were you fearful or did I yell like that right from our childhood, anytime...'

Shlok 14: "I hope that Vaidehi has also heard that voice which is similar to that of mine, and I hope frightened 
as she is she might have also hastened you, and I hope you also have come to see me, that hastily! [3-58-14]

[Commentary] Annex: 'maybe, as a woman she is hopeless of my capabilities, but you are a coequal of mine, are you 
unhopeful of my capabilities and came rushing at the haste of a hasty woman, or what!

Shlok 15: "In everyway you have caused hardship by leaving Seetha in isolation, and a leeway is given to the diabolical 
demons for a counterattack against us. [3-58-15]

[Commentary] Aside: 'anyway, a congratulatory hardship is caused by you to the demonic race, in unleashing Seetha 
in isolation from our fetters, and a leeway is given to those diabolic demons as well as to me... as 
I cocksurely attack them now in the name of Seetha, and it is cocksure that they have to surface now 
to counterattack me, instead of these tricks and gimmicks...'

Shlok 16: "Raw-flesh eating demons are distraught as I have liquidated Khara, as a result those ghastly ones would 
have liquidated Seetha by now. There is no doubt about it. [3-58-16]

Shlok 17: "In everyway I am sunken in scourge, but oh, enemy-eliminator Lakshmana, what I can possibly do in present 
situation? Perchance, this sort of scourge is liable to chance upon me, alas!" Thus Rama gave vent to 
his feelings on his way to hermitage. [3-58-17]

Shlok 18: In this way while thinking emotively about that curvaceous Seetha, Raghava hurriedly returned to Janasthaana 
along with Lakshmana. [3-58-18]

Shlok 19: He that Rama who chastened his younger brother en route is worried in aspect and wizened is his mouth 
by hunger, by strain, and also thus by thirst, and suspiring heavily he arrived near at hermitage, and 
became dispirited when he beheld the hermitage in vacuity. That valiant Rama on quickly entering his 
own hermitage found it to be vacuous. Then he rushed out and went round a place of pastime of Seetha, 
saying 'yes, this is that place where she used to move round for plucking flowers.' And again he dashed 
in to hermitage only to find it as an empty cottage. Then he rushed out to some other place of playtime 
of Seetha yelling, 'yes, this is that place where she used play with deer, squirrels and birds.' And 
again came back to vacant hermitage, and again he dashed to some other prayer-time place exclaiming, 
'yes, this is that very place where she offered her daily prayers.' Finally on returning to the vacant 
hermitage he became one who is plunged into hair-raising throes of despair as that cottage is emptied 
of Seetha. [3-58-19, 20]



SARGA 59
------------------------------

[Text] Rama reprimands Lakshmana for coming without Seetha. Lakshmana explains that he had to leave her owing 
to her anguished and angrily words and even by her rash remarks of Lakshmana. Even then, Rama is unhappy 
of Lakshmana's action in leaving her alone.



The content of this chapter is to amplify what that has been said in the previous chapter. This dialogue 
between Rama and Lakshmana may be deemed to have happened before their approaching hermitage, as in 
the last few verses of last chapter, and on their pathway to their hermitage.

Shlok 1: Rama the descendent of Raghu, again asked Soumitri who strayed from the hermitage and whom his own anguish 
is distressing now, in the middle of path towards their hermitage. [3-59-1]

Shlok 2: Rama spoke to such Lakshmana, "when I left her in the forest, I left only on confiding in you. For what 
reason you came to me on abandoning Maithili? [3-59-2]

Shlok 3: "What my heart had been doubting, rather a perilous evil, oh, Lakshmana, that has become a fact on seeing 
only you, coming to me leaving off Maithili. [3-59-3]

Shlok 4: "Seeing your coming without Seetha on pathway at a distance my left eye and left shoulder have pulsated, 
and oh, Lakshmana, my heart too has fluttered." Thus Rama said to Lakshmana. [3-59-4]

Shlok 5: When Sumitra's son Lakshmana, whose traits are blamelessly auspicious is addressed thus, anguish cast 
a double spell on him, one for the tongue-lashing of Seetha while the other for the reproach from Rama, 
and he replied Rama who is anguished in his own way. [3-59-5]

Shlok 6: "I have not come here leaving her off either independently or intentionally, I came here, to your proximity, 
virtually driven by her hurtful words." Thus Lakshmana is relying Rama. [3-59-6]

Shlok 7: "Maithili gave an ear to that message which is loudly shouted as if by your honour saying, 'ha, Seetha... 
ha, Lakshmana... save me immediately...' [3-59-7]

Shlok 8: "On hearing that grievous voice of yours and owing to her love for you she shuddered with fear and wept 
out to me 'hurry up...get going...' [3-59-8]

Shlok 9: "When she frequently and insistingly compelled me to go, I have replied Maithili in this sentence which 
is expressive of my confidence in you. [3-59-9]

Shlok 10: " 'I do no think that there is a demon who can cause panic to Rama. All this is feigning. Someone might 
have typified his voice in this way, please control yourself. [3-59-10]

Shlok 11: " 'How can my esteemed brother who can safeguard even gods, oh, Seetha, will exclaim in saying, 'save 
me,' which is a highly disparaging and basely manner to call for the help of a lady to safeguard him 
in such circumstances. [3-59-11]

[Commentary] A hero will not expose a lady to risk when he himself is involved in such a risky position. aapat kaale 
strii samaahvaanasya kshudra kR^ityatvaat kutsitam - Govindaraja.

Shlok 12: " 'But, somehow, for some reason, someone mimicking my brother's voice discordantly shouted words saying, 
'Lakshmana save me.' [3-59-12]

Shlok 13: " 'Oh, auspicious lady, it is unbefitting for you to panic, like lowly womenfolk who will be frivolously 
panicking for flimsy reasons, for the words like 'save me,' shouted by some demon, who may conceivably 
be Maareecha. [3-59-13]

Shlok 14: " 'Enough is your slipping into consternation and you be undismayed. There is none in all the three 
worlds who took birth, or going to take birth, to defeat Raghava in any given battle of any terrible 
nature. Raghava is undefeatable even if all gods come battling along with Indra in their van.' This 
is what I said to Vaidehi" Thus Lakshmana is informing Rama. [3-59-14, 15]

Shlok 16: "Though I said thus, while her volition is overly besotted for you, Vaidehi said this tartly word to 
me outpouring tears. [3-59-16]

Shlok 17: " 'In my respect you have harboured only an impure and nastily perspective to achieve me on the utter 
ruination of your brother, but I am unachievable to you. [3-59-17]

Shlok 18: " 'As to why you are refraining to rush towards Rama even though he is inordinately yelling, it hints 
that Bharata made some arrangements with you, and that is the reason why you have closely followed Rama 
in exile. [3-59-18]

Shlok 19: " 'You are an adversary of Rama comporting yourself in disguise, following him because of me, and searching 
for a leeway from Rama. Thereby now you are not rushing to Rama. [3-59-19]

Shlok 20: "When Vaidehi spoke to me thus I hurriedly came out of hermitage to you with anger reddening my eyes 
and trembling my lips. [3-59-20]

Shlok 21: Rama who is deluded by angst said to Soumitri who is speaking thus, that "your arrival without her is 
an improper deed, oh, gentle one. [3-59-21]

Shlok 22: "You know that I am capable enough to foil the demons, even then you have come out by the angry words 
of Maithili? [3-59-22]

Shlok 23: "On hearing bitter words of an angry lady you have came away on leaving her off, such as you are, I 
am not at all happy with you. [3-59-23]

Shlok 24: "That which action of yours is there in non-compliance of my directive to stand guard to Seetha, either 
compelled by Seetha, or coming under your own ire, it shows your dereliction in everyway. [3-59-24]

Shlok 25: "By whom I am detoured from hermitage in the form of a deer he is indeed a demon, and he fell flat when 
my arrow hit him down. [3-59-25]

Shlok 26: "When I effortlessly shot an arrow setting on bowstring and stretching the bow to full length, he hit 
by that arrow left deer's body to become a piteously bewailing demon wearing bracelets and the like 
ornaments. [3-59-26]

Shlok 27: "Then hit down by arrow thus, he with an anguished voice that is clearly audible at a very remotely 
place and that which is mimicking my voice, uttered those highly gruesome words, whereby you have come 
here forsaking Maithili." Thus Rama said to Lakshmana on their way to their hermitage. [3-59-27]



SARGA 60
------------------------------

[Text] Rama laments for Seetha's separation. He starts searching for her and goes on asking every plant, tree 
and animal, in a kind of frenzied attitude. This chapter is too poetic to summarise, hence this much 
is said here.

Shlok 1: While Rama is coming towards hermitage his lower eyelid frequently fluttered, his gait faltered, and 
he missed his footing. [3-60-1]

Shlok 2: On closely watching those inauspicious forebodings Rama indeed uttered oftentimes reflexly thus as, 
'would she be safe, in fact!' [3-60-2]

Shlok 3: He quickened himself and went with an ardency to see Seetha, and then on seeing an empty home his heart 
is distraught. [3-60-3]

Shlok 4- 5: Raghava looked like a flying-flutterer as his speed jostled his arms and gait flutteringly, and on closely 
probing there and there, and all-over the places of that cottage, then he saw the lustreless house of 
straw devoid of Seetha, alike a befogged wintry lotus-lake without lustre. [3-60-4, 5]

Shlok 6- 7: The trees of that woodland are seemingly weeping, as their flowers are witheringly weakening and their 
birds are weepingly warbling, and the animals are whingeingly weeping, and that woodland is charmless 
and utterly shattered, since its georgic deities have completely abandoned it. Rather utterly bestrewn 
are the deerskins and sacred grass blades, rather utterly battered are the tender-grass-seats and other 
mats in the compound of cottage, and he who ardently wanted to see Seetha, such a Rama, on seeing such 
an emptied locale and cottage, wept over, over and again. [3-60-6, 7]

[Commentary] By this bestrewn, battered, or shattered state of articles, it is evident that Seetha struggled a lot 
to get release from the clutches of Ravana, and in their tussle articles are in shambles. Hence, Ravana 
did not carry Seetha on a clod of earth as said in Adhyaatma Ramayana and other texts. Valmiki's Seetha 
is an out and out human, as of now.

Shlok 8: "That bashful Seetha might be stolen by the grudging demons, or slain by the very same grisly demons, 
or savoured by some gruesome beasts, or else she strayed in this gauntly forest, and even she might 
have playfully shrouded herself in the grimly forest, or else she must be sheltering herself in this 
forest which will be gruelling to locate. [3-60-8]

Shlok 9: "Or else, she might have again gone to pick the flowers or fruits, or again gone to lotus-lake, or gone 
to the river for water." Thinking thus, Rama started his search for Seetha. [3-60-9]

Shlok 10: Though he searched effortfully for his dear Seetha he did not get her, and as his anguish is reddening 
his eyes the appearance of that glorious one seems to be that of a madman. [3-60-10]

[Commentary] The word iva 'as though, seems to be, alike...' has some importance from the viewpoint of commentators, 
and some discussion is given in endnote on its usage. Because he is 'like' a madman, the translation 
shall also be 'like' a mad-translation, as long as he talks 'like' a madman.

Shlok 11: Rama ran speedily from tree to shrub, from hill to hillock, from river to rivulet, and revolving around 
them he wailed for Seetha, as he is inundated in a sludgy ocean of woes. [3-60-11]

[Commentary] Whether Rama 'really wept' over Seetha's absence or it the 'playacting' of god - is a much-debated topic. 
As a hero of the epic, it is 'real' weeping and it is necessary to arouse pathos, but should he be god 
or god incarnate, is 'weeping' manifest in the qualities of Omniscient - is the dilemma. Some points 
are presented in the endnote.

Shlok 12: "Oh, Kadamba tree, seest thou someone a lady who is lover of Kadamba flowers, one with a lovable face 
and a love of mine, thou tellest me if thou knowest. [3-60-12]

Shlok 13: "Oh, Bilva tree, if thou seest someone who is drest in yellowy-ochry silks, whose skin likens to the 
silkiness of thine leaflets, breasts to thine rotund and silky Bilva fruits, thou tellest me... [3-60-13]

Shlok 14: "Otherwise, thou Arjuna tree, if thou knowest her who is a lover of thine Arjuna flowers and the ladylove 
of mine, thou telleth whether that slender-waisted daughter of Janaka liveth or otherwise... [3-60-14]

Shlok 15: "As to how this Kakubha tree shineth laden with creepy-creepers, foliole-foliage and flowery-flowers, 
this tree knowest Maithili whose thighs can be likened to the smoothish trunk of this very Kakubha tree... 
[3-60-15]

Shlok 16: "As to how this best tree among all trees heareth the chorus of honeybees that singest around it, thereby 
this Tilaka tree clearly knowest Maithili, a lover of Tilaka trees, as this shouldst have heard her. 
[3-60-16]

Shlok 17: "Oh, Ashoka tree, an alleviator of agony, that is thine name lingually... but practically and readily 
name me after thine, by showing my ladylove, as my agony has marred my empathy... [3-60-17]

Shlok 18: "Oh, Palm tree, if thou seest that lady breasted alike ripened-palm fruits of thine, and if thine mercy 
is mine, thou telleth of that shapely lady Seetha... [3-60-18]

Shlok 19: "Oh, Rose-apple tree, if thou seest Seetha and thee knowest my ladylove with golden glitter, thou telleth 
me without hesitation...



"Oh, Rose-apple tree, if thou seest Seetha and thou knowest my ladylove whose complexion is smoothish 
like thine Rose-apples, thou telleth me unhesitatingly... [3-60-19]

Shlok 20: "Aha! Karnikaara tree, now thou art in full bloom and blooming magnificently, if thou seest that lover 
of Karnikaara-flowers and an immaculate ladylove of mine, thou telleth me... [3-60-20]

[Commentary] Annex: 'you all might have seen when your friend was imperilled and you might have complained, or cried 
out with the rustle of your leaves or gestured with the swings of your branches, as humans would do 
with their voice and hands... and the birds and bees nestled on you also might have chorused, sadly... 
but those birds and bees are unable to communicate what has happened... you trees, though you may not 
have rushed to rescue her, as you are pegged on ground, you indicate to me, at least with your branchy 
gestures, what exactly has happened...

Shlok 21: Rama has gone on asking trees like mango, niipa, massive saala, jack-fruit, kuruva, dhava, and even 
around daaDima, bakula, punnaaga, sandalwood, ketaka trees, and when he is running around them that 
highly glorious Rama appeared like a madman. [3-60-21, 22]

Shlok 23: "Or else, oh, deer, dost thou know what bechanced to that fawn-eyed Maithili, one with quick-looks like 
thee deer? Or else, hast she herded herself into the herd of she-deer of yours... [3-60-23]

[Commentary] Annex: 'poor trees... they cannot air their expression, hence Maithili is unsaid by them... but you 
deer, you can voice and gesticulate, then voice it out or gesticulate, since that Maithili is an all 
time playmate of you deer... and you are an expert in escaping, and you might have escaped when Maithili 
was in danger, does not matter, it is your nature, now tell me what exactly has happened...' [but, then 
that deer ran in a particular way, but Rama is now unable to decipher it... and concludes,] 'now also 
you are escaping expertly... leave it at that...'

Shlok 24: "Oh, elephant, thou mightst beheld her whose thighs likens to your trunk at that problematic hour, thus 
methinks, and that Maithili is familiar to thee, and oh, best elephant, if thou beholdest her, thou 
tallest me... [3-60-24]

[Commentary] Annex: 'though you are a pachyderm you are keen-eyed and you can find out even a thorn in the weed, 
also you are around this place for a long time, thus well acquainted with all of us... hence I deem 
that something must have happened and somehow you might have seen... though you could not prevent it 
with your massive head, trunk or legs, but tell me what exactly has happened...

Shlok 25: "Fear not, oh, tiger, hast thou seen Maithili, the moonfaced ladylove of mine, if thou hast seen speak 
in good faith... [3-60-25]

[Commentary] Annex: 'I know that you are a master prowler and a brave one, these deer and elephants are somehow fearing 
to tell me, but you tell me because you're a brave one... did you not prowl the prowler of Maithili... 
I also know that equal is the fear when one sees a tiger or when a tiger sees one... now you need not 
lift up your fore-paw and step back on seeing me... as I cause no harm now... but tell me, whether you 
ran after that one who caused some harm to Seetha or not, as Seetha never harmed you, when you were 
on the prowl hereabouts...' But that tiger retraced its steps, because Rama is an archer with a bow 
and arrows, without telling him that without exception all the animals vainly ran after Ravana trying 
to rescue Seetha. Such as he is, an uninformed one, he starts a delirious soliloquy in imagery.

Shlok 26: "Oh lotus-eyed lady, in fact I have seen you my dear, then why this running away and concealing yourself 
under trees, why do not you reply me... [3-60-26]

Shlok 27: "Stay...stay... oh, best lady, don't you have mercy on me? You are not unacceptably tease-humoured! 
What for you ignore me? [3-60-27]

Shlok 28: "Oh, beautifully complexioned lady, even if you are running away your yellowy silk-sari betokens you, 
stay, if you have goodwill for me... [3-60-28]

Shlok 29: "Otherwise, she whom I have just seen me may not be Seetha, why because, it is unapt of her to avoid 
me who attained this wretched state, hence Seetha with cheery smiles is certainly murdered... [3-60-29]

Shlok 30: "Obviously the raw-flesh gorgers must have gorged that youngish lady on diving all her limbs in my absence 
from my dear one... [3-60-30]

Shlok 31: "Her face which is similar to a full-moon with pretty teeth, prettier lips, prettily nose and with prettyish 
earrings, might have obtained a blanched look when being devoured... [3-60-31]

Shlok 32: "But that exquisite and beautiful neck of that lady which shines forth in the colour of Campaka flower, 
befitting for any neck ornament, indeed it might be glutted down while she is bewailing... [3-60-32]

Shlok 33: "Her two arms which are delicate like tender leaves, ornamented with bangles and bicep-lets might have 
been definitely nibbled while they are wriggling with quivering fingers... [3-60-33]

Shlok 34: "This is as though I have forsaken this youngish Seetha really as a feast for the demons in my absence, 
and though Seetha has many relatives she has become as worse as a lonesome woman who is completely forsaken 
by her caravan who is lonesomely ready for the feast of highwaymen, and demons have feasted on her. 
[3-60-34]

Shlok 35: "Ha, Lakshmana... oh, dextrous one... have you seen my ladylove anywhere... ha, dear, where have you 
gone... oh, auspicious lady... ha, Seetha..." thus Rama lamented again and again in his search. [3-60-35]

Shlok 36- 37a: On bewailing in this way and on overly rushing from wood to wood, somewhere Rama has become highly delusional 
by the forcefulness of delusion and spots forest stuff as Seetha, though none of them have any resemblance 
to Seetha, and somewhere else, marking creepers, plants or slender shrubs and suchlike delicacies as 
Seetha he has become really alluded by the powerfulness of allusion, and elsewhere, he is not discriminating 
paths or pathless routes for his trekking as an impassioned one in the search of his ladylove, and thus 
he is nitid like a madman. [3-60-36, 37a]

Shlok 37: Rama is on the rove around woods, rivers, hills, mountain-rapids and thicketed forests, speedily and 
restlessly. [3-60-37]

Shlok 38: On going round the vast of great forest in that way and on searching for Maithili, his hope became intangible, 
but again he undertook the search for his ladylove, over-strenuously. [3-60-38]

[Commentary] Maheshvara Tiirtha says that, 'the word 
iva 'alike, seemingly, as though' is to be ellipted to all the expressions given by Rama, as 
god incarnate Rama did not 'really' weep over...' As such the expressions will become:
shokaat paripluta iva, shokaat pradhaavan iva, vilapan iva etc., and they 
mean 'as though he is inundated in sea called lamentation... as though he wept... as though he ran after...' 
and the like. For this the viSNu puraaNa, umaa samhita is cited as reference, 
where Vishnu himself says: aham 
daasharathiH buutvaa hanmi raavaNam aahave | shrii mad raama avataare asmin aj~navat kriyate mama | tatra 
shankaa na kartavyaa sarvaj~nena api maayayaa | mat maayaa mohitam rakSho manuShyam maam avekShyati | 
anyathaa tasya saa nuunam na bhavet atra kutracit 'I on becoming Dasharatha's son 
will eliminate Ravana in combat... though Omniscient I conduct myself in the incarnation of Rama as 
a commoner by my Maya... thereby no doubt be nurtured by any... believing me a human Ravana will be 
mislead, as there is no other way for his elimination...' thus Tiirtha says that Rama did not actually 
'weep or wail...'

[Commentary] But this is contradicted and said by later commentators, 'though 
Rama is Supreme Being he took up human incarnation and he conducted himself as a human. Hence there 
is no need to ellipt ellipses for many a time and portray him as a 'direct' god on earth. Valmiki has 
said this more than once through Rama's words that he is just a 'human...' aatmaanam 
aham maanuSam manye 'I for myself am a human...' etc., and here also Valmiki used this word
iva only at a few places like unmatta iva, udbhraanta 
iva Even if Rama were to be 'god' on earth, for his fate of taking a human incarnation he is 
fated to behave as a human, and gets involved in human emotions, according to situations and his mental 
conditions. In such conditions, for he is 'god' he can 'evoke' an emotion as he evoked rancour many 
times when eliminating demons as in the episodes of Aranya when he was eliminating Khara, Dushana, and 
others. There is roSam aahaarayat tiivram... 'rancour, evoking, unusual...' 
'and then evoking an unusual rancour to eliminate Khara in war, he eliminated Khara...' as at 3-30-19. 
Here when the word roSam is replaced with shokam 
and if it be said as shokam aaharayet tiivram... it suffices all contradictions. 
And in many other places, we see him aaharayet 'getting' wrath or sadness, 
or other humanly emotion. When he can 'evoke' one human emotion 'wrath', why not evoke other emotions 
like 'love, sadness, pity, kindness' and the like. Again, there are some subhuman emotions like greed, 
avarice, hate, jealousy etc., which are unbefitting to humans themselves, hence the question of Rama's 
evoking them for his activities, does not arise.

[Commentary] Then 'is this playacting of god, of hoodwinking of man called 
Rama in the name of Ravana...' is the connective question. The answer is 'neither...' for it is maya 
of Vishnu. In other way, it is not hoodwinking of Rama but it is the bewailing of god/Rama caused by 
the suffering of his adherents/devotee/subjects - particularly for Seetha, who is not just a devotee 
or adherer, but his own altar ego. Particularly when that god alone, through the so-called destiny, 
karma, fate etc, causes that suffering. Rama admits at verse 34 of this chapter 'this is as though I 
have forsaken this Seetha...' because of his passion for hunting, either the deer or the demon, thus 
bechanced is an ill fate on Seetha.

[Commentary] If Rama were to be god, he is not an 'featureless' god of
advaita tenet, a nirguNa but he is
saguNa 'featured' god and some of his many features are:
svabhaavika anavadhika atishaya, j~naana, bala, aishvarya, viirya, shakti, tejaH, 
saushiilya, maardava, aarjava, sauhaardra, saumya, kaaruNya, maadhuryam, gaambhiirya, audaaryaadi aneka 
kalyaaNa guNa sampanna... of which we are concerned with kaaruNya, maardava 
features, 'pity and sheltering...' as Shudarshanaacaarya defined maardavam 
as aashrita viraha a-sahatvam maardavam 'impatience for the separation 
from his adherers...' and Rama wept with this pity and impatience for Seetha's separation from him.

[Commentary] However delinquent the children be, they do not know or care to 
know what their parents feel about their delinquency, because they themselves are thinking that they 
are not at all delinquent. But their parents, though they are aware of their children's delinquency, 
but unable to mend them, they suffer silently or blatantly. Here too it is the same predicament for 
Rama, though it is not parent-child relation, but it is man-wife relation, worthier enough for more 
suffering. His anguish is for the 'soul' called Seetha, going to be captivated in the 'body' called 
Lanka, and her deliverance is possible only on the annihilation of that body or holder of that body, 
namely Ravana, in the karmic cycle of birth-death. And none has a real glimpse or knowledge of that 
god or soul, but all go on assuming on their own as Bhagavad Gita says at7-24:

[Commentary] avyaktam 
vyaktim aapannam manyate maam a-buddhaya | param bhaavam ajaananto mama avyayam anuttamam | gita

[Commentary] Which deem th' Unmanifested manifest, / Not comprehending Me in my true Self! 
/ Imperishable, viewless, undeclared, - Sir Edwin Arnold. Hence, Rama really wept for Seetha 
and in fact, gods really weep even for us, madly and sadly, but we do not care, or wish to care.



SARGA 61
------------------------------

[Text] Rama laments for Seetha and becomes despondent. But at the advice of Lakshmana both of them start a 
search for Seetha, presuming that she might be available in the proximity. Later they embark on a thorough 
search in the entire forest and its mountains and at lakesides, but Seetha is unseen.



From here, until Rama meets Hanuma in next book Kishkindha, Rama's lamentation is continually portrayed. 
This may not be taken as a mere 'weeping' or 'bemoaning' of the principal character of the epic, but 
this has many poetics and romantics of epical poetry imbibed in it. An epic, basically, requires a hero 
to have his romantic attributes, naayaka lakshaNaaH and these 'wailings' 
will portray all of them. There are various, numerous and voluminous derivatives, meanings and commentaries, 
which cannot possibly be included in here, at this stage, except for passing references on them. Hence, 
this lengthy lamentation has lengthier romanticism.

Shlok 1- 2: On seeing the vacant threshold of the hermitage and empty cottage of straw, also at the leaf-mat-seats 
that are utterly shattered, and not finding Vaidehi even on watchfully eyeing everywhere Rama shrieked 
loudly, and then on clasping the winning shoulders of Lakshmana he said this to him. [3-61-1, 2]

Shlok 3: "Oh, Lakshmana, possibly where can be Vaidehi? Or, to which place she has gone from here? Or, Soumitri, 
who stole her away? Or, who has gorged up my ladylove? [3-61-3]

Shlok 4: "Oh, Seetha, if you have concealed yourself under trees wishing to poke fun at me, enough is your fun 
and games, get in touch with me now, as I am highly anguished... [3-61-4]

Shlok 5: "Oh, meek Seetha, with which meekly young deer you were playing, all these are now broody with tearfully 
fluttery looks, without you... [3-61-5]

Shlok 6- 7a: "Really Lakshmana, I will not live long without Seetha, indeed I am enveloped in high anguish caused 
by the abduction of Seetha, and this alone will become a murderer, and on my going to other world when 
murdered by my own agony my father and that great king Dasharatha will definitely observe me in the 
other world... [3-61-6, 7a]

[Commentary] Some other mms contain the word mR^itam 'dead ...' instead of the word vR^itam 'enveloped...' 'when 
I am dead and gone to other world, there my father will ask me...' would then be its meaning.

Shlok 7b- 8- 9a: "When I go to other world after my death our father Dasharatha who is already staying there will deride 
me saying, 'when I have directed you for a fourteen year exile, and when you too have assuredly agreed 
and promised me for that term, how you have to my presence in this ultramundane world without completing 
that term of fourteen year exile, besides breaking your own word of honour... thus you have become a 
wilful disobedient, despicable and dishonest person, such as you are, fie on you...' [3-61-7b, 8, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10- 11a: "Anguish seared and bewildered me and I am woebegone with broken down buoyancy, and oh, beautiful lady, 
jilting such an woeful one as I am, where you are going now, as with prestige jilting a prevaricator? 
And if you shun me I will have to shun my life..." Thus Rama bewailed imaging her right in his front 
and running away. [3-61-9b, 10, 11a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: Though that legatee of Raghu is desperate for seeing Seetha, though he is highly anguished and agonised, 
though he bewailed this way, that Rama has not found Janaka's daughter, Seetha. [3-61-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 13: To him who is unable to find Seetha, and who is sinking in sadness as with an elephant sinking in a 
chasmal mud, Lakshmana spoke to such a Rama in a positive manner desiring his wellbeing. [3-61-11b, 
13]

Shlok 14: "Oh, well-informed one, do not get into desperation, you make efforts along with me, and oh, brave one, 
this best mountain is beaming forth with many caves, she may be there somewhere. [3-61-14]

Shlok 15- 16a: "Maithili is a fascinated saunterer in woodlands so she might have entered the forest, she is even infatuated 
with waters, so she might have gone to the fully bloomed lotus-lake, or to the river that is adorned 
by fishes and cane-breaks. [3-61-15]

Shlok 16b- 17: "Or, wishing to know our reaction when she scares us with her prank, Maithili might have squirreled 
away into forest. Oh, honourable brother, let us endeavour quickly to search her. [3-61-16]

Shlok 18: "Oh, Rama of Kakutstha, if you consider that we shall search the forest in its entirety to locate where 
she that Janaka's daughter might be, let us quickly do so. But do not engulf your heart in sadness." 
Thus Lakshmana advised Rama. [3-61-18]

Shlok 19: When Lakshmana good-heartedly spoke this way, Rama self-collectedly made a headway for the search of 
Seetha along with Soumitri. [3-61-19]

Shlok 20: Those two sons of Dasharatha have started a thorough search for Seetha in forests, on mountains, also 
thus at rivers and lakes. [3-61-20]

Shlok 21: On searching whole of mountainsides of that Mt. Chitrakuta, where their hermitage is there, even in 
its caves, crags, and mountain peaks they have not found Seetha. [3-61-21]

Shlok 22: On exploring everywhere on that mountain Rama said to Lakshmana, "oh, Soumitri, here on this mountain 
I do not descry auspicious Vaidehi." [3-61-22]

Shlok 23: While roving searchingly in Dandaka forest Lakshmana who is tormented by anguish said a sentence to 
his greatly resplendent brother Rama. [3-61-23]

Shlok 24: "Oh, insightful brother, you will reacquire Janaka's daughter Maithili, as Vishnu once subjugated Emperor 
Bali and reacquired this earth." [3-61-24]

Shlok 25: But when the valiant Lakshmana addressed him in that way, Raghava whose thinking is marred by poignance 
spoke these pathetic words. [3-61-25]

Shlok 27: "This forest in its entirety, these lotus-lakes with their blossomed lotuses, and this mountain with 
its many caves and mountain-rapids, all are evidently searched. But, oh, sensible brother, I do not 
descry Vaidehi who is loftier than my lives." [3-61-27]

Shlok 28: Lamenting in this way Rama languished owing to the abduction of Seetha and became a pitiable one, and 
while sadness besieging him he is perturbed for a moment. [3-61-28]

Shlok 29: All the limbs of Rama are fluttered, his faculty has become functionless, his fervour is frozen, he 
is forlorn and flustered, and such as he is he sank down suspiring swelteringly and lengthily. [3-61-29]

Shlok 30: Suspiring repeatedly he that lotus-eyed Rama shrieked repeatedly and loudly thus as, 'ha, Seetha...' 
with tears stifling his throat. [3-61-30]

Shlok 31: Though Rama has many kinsfolk who hold him dear he is now left with a single one, namely Lakshmana, 
and that obedient brother Lakshmana who is already anguished for Rama's sadness, then adjoining his 
palms obediently started to pacify Rama with divers methods. [3-61-31]

Shlok 32: But disavowing the word of advice that fell out from the cupped lips of Lakshmana, Rama stridently yelled 
again and again when his dear Seetha has become unseeable. [3-61-32]



SARGA 62
------------------------------

[Text] Rama bewails for Seetha as an ambivert, ambivalent romantic epical hero and asks
Lakshmana to return to Ayodhya, as Rama is certain to perish without Seetha. He thinks his agony
aloud, weighing pros and cons of his situation.

Shlok 1: In not seeing Seetha that virtue-souled Rama's sagacity is marred by his anguish and
he bewailed with his lotus-like eyes that are reddening like a pair of lotuses, raising is long
arms. [3-62-1]

[Commentary] Some mms use the word kaama in the compound shoka upahata
cetanaH thus it becomes kaama upahata cetana and then it means 'his sagacity is
marred by desire for Seetha...' and because of the adjacency of word dharmaatmaa
'righteous one...' 'a righteous desire is no sin to desire for... hence his desire for Seetha is
righteous...' Then mahaabaahuu denotes that he is wailing raising his long arms, and
kamala locana is indicative of redness of lotuses, thus his eyes are reddening by his
wailing.

Shlok 2: Even if Raghava is not able to see Seetha in his presence he started talking to her
in a kind of inarticulate wailing, as wailing pampered his articulacy because his speech took
shelter of wailing instinct, and as he is cowed down by Love-god, and thus he started to vent out
his heart in this way. [3-62-2]

[Commentary] Here the poet is starting the sixth phase among the ten phases called
manmadha avasthaaH 'phases of pangs of love,' and this one is called a + rati
'non-indulgence, the ambivalence, the ambiversion...' of the romantic hero, in romantic epical
poetry.

Shlok 3: "Flowers fascinate you very much, my dear, hence you veil yourself with the full
bloomed branches of Ashoka tree, but that alone is amplifying my anguish because you both have
presently became tormentors. [3-62-3]

[Commentary] We may recount the idea reg. Ashoka flowers expressed at 3-60-17.

Shlok 4: "Maybe, both your thighs liken to the stalks of banana plants, thinking so, now you
have lapped them in grovy banana plants, but I can distinguish which is which, thus now I caught
sight of them, oh, lady, you are inapt at least to cover them from me. [3-62-4]

Shlok 5: "Oh, lady, you are facetiously glorying in the boscage of fully bloomed Karnikaara
trees which is really wafting worry to me, rather than the fragrance of those flowers oh, glorious
lady, enough, enough is this facetiousness of yours. [3-62-5]

Shlok 6- 7a: "I am aware of your humour, lady, and I know that you are jocose, but in a place
like hermitage unmerited is this sort of raillery, even if it is good-natured. Hence, you come
back, oh, wide-eyed one, your cottage is empty. [3-62-6, 7a]

[Commentary] Be it a cottage or a palace, minus a housewife, it cannot be called a 'home' na gR^iham gR^iha iti 
aahuH gR^ihiNii gR^iham ucyate | gR^iham tu gR^ihiNii hiinam araNyam sadR^ishamatam || Maha Bharata, 
12-144-6; bhaaryaahiinam gR^ihasthasya shuunyam eva gR^iham bhavet | 'a house is a house when housewife 
is there, otherwise it amounts to a forest...' 'a house to the householder is a void, if the housewife 
is not there...'

Shlok 7b- 8a: "Oh, Lakshmana, very evidently demons have either gorged up Seetha, or perhaps
abducted her, because she is not returning to me who am whiny indeed for her. [3-62-7b, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: "Indeed these teary-eyed mobs of deer look as if to explain that nightwalkers have
gluttonised my lady. [3-62-8b, 9a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: "Ha! My graceful lady, to where you have strayed now... Ha! Chastely and best
complexioned lady, now the ambition of my queen mother Kaikeyi will be fulfilled, as I breath my
last owing to your straying... [3-62-8b, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: "I have come to forests with Seetha and have to go back to Ayodhya without Seetha.
How, in all but name, can I step into an oblivion called my palace-chambers? [3-62-9b, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: "People will denounce me as a vigourless and pitiless person, and my ineptitude will
indeed be self-evident, for Seetha is led away from me by some tactical being... [3-62-10b,
11a]

Shlok 11b- 12a: "When the king of Mithila Janaka asks after the wellbeing of all the three of us
after the completion of forest living, how do I have the face to stand him? [3-62-11b, 12a]

Shlok 12b- 13a: "On seeing me without Seetha the king of Videha will be distraught by the perishing
of his daughter, and he defiantly goes under the preponderance of perplexity... [3-62-12b, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: "Instead, I prefer not to go to the city Ayodhya that is ruled by Bharata, because
it must be comforting to one and all under his rulership, but not to me as Seetha will not be with
me... else if, that end of my life occurs now and if I were to go to heaven, even that heaven will
be a void to me without her... I believe so... [3-62-13b, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: "Hence, Lakshmana, you go back to that auspicious city Ayodhya forsaking me in
forests, because I have no existence without Seetha, isn't it! [3-62-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: "On tightly hugging Bharata you shall tell him these words as I have said, 'Rama
authorises you to reign the earth...' [3-62-16]

Shlok 17b- 18: "Oh, efficacious Lakshmana, on revering my mothers Kaika, Sumitra, and Kausalya
justifiably you tell them my good bye, and you as the one who effectuates whatever is assigned to
you, you have to effortfully protect my mother Kausalya by doing whatever she says. [3-62-17b,
18]

Shlok 19: "Oh, the subjugator of unfriendly, Lakshmana... you shall clearly inform in detail
about this perish of Seetha, also that of mine, to our mothers. [3-62-19]

Shlok 20: Thus Raghava, the dejected, neared every corner of the forest in his search, and
bewailed because that lady with best plaits, Seetha, is not found and missing from him. Even
Lakshmana became whey-faced, frantic-hearted, highly overwrought, by the fear of uncertainty
looming large on them. [3-62-20]



SARGA 63
------------------------------

[Text] Rama laments while searching for Seetha and reminiscing over his past, which was spent happily with 
Seetha. Rama and Lakshmana search for her at riversides of Godavari but she is unseen there. Though 
Lakshmana continuously encourages Rama for a thorough search without submitting to mere anguish, Rama 
sinks into his own anguish.

Shlok 1: That prince Rama whom agony and anguish are distressing has become anxious in his mien, and he again 
drifted into a dire desperation while despairing his brother Lakshmana. [3-63-1]

Shlok 2: Rama who is sunken in a chasmal sorrow spoke this sentence while wailing sorrowfully, suspiring severely 
and scorchingly, and which sentence is seemly to his sensitivity, to Lakshmana who is already under 
the sway of sorrow. [3-63-2]

Shlok 3: "I am second to none among the blameworthy wrongdoers on this earth, thus I deem, and indeed woe followed 
by woe are getting at me in seriation to burst my heart and mind... [3-63-3]

Shlok 4: "I might have definitely, habitually, and desirably committed damnable deeds in my previous births, 
and now the result of those impious deeds is very much ripened and has fallen on me, whereby I am entering 
misery after misery... [3-63-4]

[Commentary] As with the accrual of merit by good deeds, sin also accrues with impious or sinful acts anena janmaantara 
kR^ita paapa anuruupam phalam bhavati iti arthaH - strii parvaaNi - nuunam vyapakR^itam puurveShu janmaasu 
| yena maam duHkhabhaageShu dhaataa karmasu yuktkavaan - mahaa bhaarata - dk and this ripens and 
bechances at a later time in the shape of misfortune.

Shlok 5: "I am deprived of the kingdom, departed from my own people, mainly Seetha, my father departed and I 
am detached from my mother, and Lakshmana, when all these setbacks are very deeply thought over they 
are replenishing the haste of my agony... [3-63-5]

Shlok 6: "All this sadness of mine has silenced physically and there is some peace on coming to these desolate 
forests, in association of Seetha, but with the dissociation of Seetha misery is again upshot, as with 
fire which flares up in a flash when fuel is added... [3-63-6]

Shlok 7: "My noblewoman might be abducted by a demon, and on reaching the sky that lady who converses with a 
sweet voice might have wept a lot fearfully, and it is definite that she must have shouted a lot, untunefully... 
[3-63-7]

Shlok 8: "Those two roundish bosoms of my ladylove which always deserved the application of pleasantly looking 
red-sandalwood's paste might definitely be unshiny, as they might be bedaubed with muddy blood when 
they are extricated from her body for devouring. [3-63-8]

Shlok 9: "She has a sweet, softish, and very clear talkativeness on her lips. That visage with such lips is crowned 
with a hairdo with hair lumped together and plaited, such as her visage is, it must have become unshiny 
on her going into the repression of demon, as with an unshiny moon when repressed in the mouth of eclipsing 
planet Raahu, it is definite... [3-63-9]

Shlok 10: "The contours of the neck of that strait-laced ladylove of mine are always worthy for necklaces and 
chain-wears. The bloodthirsty demons would have indeed mangled that neck in a secluded place and they 
might have drunk her blood, it is definite... [3-63-10]

Shlok 11: "While I was away from her in this uninhibited forest demons would have forcibly hauled her up when 
they are abducting that lady with broad-bright eyes, and she would have discordantly shrieked out like 
a piteous she-dove, it is definite... [3-63-11]

Shlok 12: "Sitting very close to me on this stone's surface, oh, Lakshmana, she that well-mannered Seetha with 
bright smiles was speaking to you verbosely with all smiles... [3-63-12]

[Commentary] He is recollecting his romantic dalliances with Seetha at the riverside of
Godavari. asmin 'in here, hereabouts which now is devoid of Seetha, she used to playfully
tease me in our swimming sports in this River Godavari...' maya saartham where maya sa
artham 'I thought I was winning... but, she who is used to have an upper hand... hence, then I
became secondary...' udaara shiilaa 'well-mannered' Seetha... for she did not bother me
for such a frolicking when we were in Ayodhya, and she with all her mannerliness maintained a
distance from me, as there were her father-in-law, mother-in-laws in Ayodhya, but here only two of
us who are with ourselves, and we rejoiced freely...' shilaa tale upa upa viSTaa 'on the
surface of any stone wherever I wanted to gain a foothold after straining myself in swim-games, she
used to reach and sit on each and every acclivitous stone, prior to my reaching it, and she used to
spatter water on my face, to continue more swimming... but, I was really fatigued...' then she is
one jaata haasaa 'in whom laughter took birth...she used to burst out peals of laughter...
that declare me as a defeated one...' And then tvaam bahu vaakya jaata aaha 'she used talk
to you a lot, with lots of words, as you are in the habit of always extolling me, and she was
saying to you... 'you two are mightier than the mighty, but I am a woman, you two are males and can
hunt the cruellest animals, but I am woman, a rabbit in the kitchen... but, see how I defeated your
almighty brother...' and the like...'

[Commentary] 'A very interesting and linguistically important case of a prepositional verb is
provided by the verses [that contain] upopaviSTa... upa vish... originally must have meant
'to sit near'. In course of time, the idea of closeness or proximity was lost and it came to be
used in the sense of sitting only. Now when the idea of nearness or proximity had to be expressed
one more upa was prefixed to it. Thus, we see how tautological tendencies were influencing
Sanskrit in the very hoary past. The Ramayana upopaviSTa has its parallel n Hindi paas
baiThnaa [where] baiThnaa is upa veshana which itself means to sit near
upa= paas. But still paas is used with baiThnaa...' The Ramayana, A
Linguistic Study, Pt. Satya Vrat. And to supplement Panditji's above saying, even in English this
is evident and Oxford in saying meaning for proximity, says 'sat in close proximity to them' where
'proximity' itself is one upa and 'close' is another upa... Thus tautology is
same everywhere.

Shlok 13: "Among rivers this Godavari is the best and it is an all the time cherished river to my ladylove, and 
I think she would have gone thereunto. But, at anytime she did not go there, singly... [3-63-13]

Shlok 14: "Or, that lotus-faced, lotus-petal eyed Seetha has gone straight to bring lotuses! Nay, that idea itself 
is incongruous, for she never goes to get lotuses, indeed without me... [3-63-14]

Shlok 15: "But has she really gone to this stand of thicket which is with flowered trees and with birds of divers 
kind! Nay, that thought also is incongruent, because she as a timid one is much scared of solitude... 
[3-63-15]

Shlok 16: "Oh, Sun, you are the knower of performed and unperformed deeds in the world, a wittnesser of good and 
bad deeds in the world, tell me, who am woefully writhing, to where my ladylove strolled, or is she 
stolen... [3-63-16]

Shlok 17: "Oh, Air, whatsoever is there in the world, wheresoever it might be, or whensoever it might have happened, 
and whichsoever it might be, and whencesoever it might exist, that cannot possibly be unknown to you. 
Hence, tell me of the lady from noble heritage... is she stolen, or slain, or strayed her steps..." 
Thus Rama begged of the Eternals for locating Seetha. [3-63-17]

Shlok 18: To such a Rama whose physique is routed by his anguish in this way and who is insensately bewailing 
in that way, Soumitri whose courage is un-dispirited gave a justifiable and timely suggestion. [3-63-18]

Shlok 19: "Oh, noble brother, banish that anguish and brace yourself with fortitude, and let you be with spiritedness 
in her searching... indeed, there is no backsliding for spirited men in their enterprises in this world, 
even though the enterprises are highly impracticable..." [3-63-19]

[Commentary] Lack of fortitude and spiritedness will sink anyone in a chasmal self-centred
subjective grief. anena dhairya
utsaahau shokam apanudya kaarya saadhakau iti suucitam - tathaa ca bhaatate - droNa parvaaNi -
abhimanyu vadhe dharma putram prati vyaasaH - shocato hi mahaa raaja hi adhame abhivartate |
tasmaat shokam parityajya shreyase prayated budhaH | praharSham abhimaanam ca cintayet | evam
GYaatvaa sthiro bhuutvaa jahi ariin dhairyam aapnuhi | dk Thus Vyaasa advises
Dharmaraja to have fortitude and courage when he was sinking under the grief for the merciless
killing of lonesome Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna, in Maha Bharata war.

Shlok 20: When Soumitri of towering bravery is speaking this way, Rama, the enhancer of Raghu's lineage, gave 
no heed to it, and since he castaway his fortitude he again encountered an inexplicable anguish. [3-63-20]



SARGA 64
------------------------------

[Text] Rama finds Seetha's flowers and footprints, followed by heavy footprints of some
male massive demon. On detailed probing there appear some more ruins of a combat between two
warriors. Concluding that Seetha is definitely abducted by a massive demon, Rama wants to
countermove the universe, even by waging a war with gods.

Shlok 1- 2a: A pitiable one, such as he is, he spoke to Lakshmana in a pitiable voice,
"Lakshmana, go quickly to River Godavari and find out whether Seetha has gone to Godavari to fetch
lotuses..." [3-64-1, 2a]

Shlok 2b- 3a: When Rama said thus to him Lakshmana again went to the charming River Godavari
quickening his pace. [3-64-2b, 3a]

Shlok 3b- 4a: Searching at many declivities which River Godavari has on its banks Lakshmana said
to Rama, "I do not espy her at ghats, declivities of riverbanks, and she is not replying though I
shouted for her. [3-64-3b, 4a]

Shlok 4b- 5a: "In fact, oh, Rama, to which place she that neutraliser of nervousness, namely
Vaidehi, has got round to, or where that frailty is, that place is really incomprehensible to me...
[3-64-4b, 5a]

Shlok 5b- 6: Rama who is already stupefied by anguish is now despaired on listening Lakshmana's
words and he personally went straight to River Godavari, and staying nearby that river Rama shouted
in this way, "Seetha... where are you?" [3-64-5b, 6]

Shlok 7: The forest creatures which were asked earlier have not said to Rama that a
deservedly destructible demagogue of demons has divested him of Seetha, likewise now River Godavari
which is now being asked has not informed Rama about Seetha. [3-64-7]

Shlok 8: Though the woeful Rama has asked her, and even though all the georgic beings
impelled her to inform Rama the fact about his ladylove, River Godavari then remained mouthless
about Seetha. [3-64-8]

Shlok 9: She that River Godavari has not informed Rama about Vaidehi just out of fear on
recalling the mien and manoeuvres of malefic-minded Ravana, lest Ravana may drain her away.
[3-64-9]

Shlok 10: Rama who is already in a rundown condition owing to the non-appearance of Seetha, is
further rendered as a hopeless being by River Godavari in the matter of his catching a glimpse of
Seetha, and such a Rama spoke to Saumitri. [3-64-10]

Shlok 11- 12a: "Oh, kind Lakshmana, this Godavari is talking to me anything but a reply. In the
absence of Vaidehi, oh Lakshmana, really what is that unpleasant word I have to say to Vaidehi's
father king Janaka, also thus to Vaidehi's mother-in-law and my mother Kausalya, when I meet them!
[3-64-11, 12a]

Shlok 12b- 13a: "Which Vaidehi is the remover of all my sadness who am a destitute of kingdom and
surviving in forests on forest produce, such as she is, where has she gone, really! [3-64-12b,
13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: "Though I am distanced from my relatives I deemed that princess Seetha alone would
be an evermore relative of mine. But now when that princess alone is unseen I deem that my
sleepless nights would be lengthy. [3-64-13b, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: "I will search all these places of Godavari, Janasthaana and this mountain with many
rapids, perhaps Seetha may be available somewhere. [3-64-14b, 15a]

[Commentary] River Mandakini is River Ganga and here River Godavari is said as Ganga as there
are five Ganga-s panca gangaa Cauvery, Tungabhadra, Krishna Veni, Gautami
[namely Godavari,] Bhaagiirathi. in Southern India and these are held sacred on par with
River Ganga.

Shlok 15b- 16a: "Now all these burly animals are repeatedly looking at me as though to speak to me,
oh, brave Lakshmana, this I reckon with their body language as it were. [3-64-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: But on seeing them pryingly that tigerly-man Raghava has indeed asked them at once
with a voice stifled with tears, "where is Seetha?" [3-64-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18- 19a: When that best king has asked, those animals rose to their feet in a trice and
facing themselves southward showed skyward with their snouts. And while running in the direction in
which Maithili is taken away they are stopping to look back at that lord of people, Rama. Thus they
are repeatedly running, stopping and staring at Rama. [3-64-17b, 18, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: By which reason those animals are going in a southerly course on a southerly
terrain, and stopping to peer at Rama, and again clamorously adopting the very same southerly
course, Lakshmana ascertained that reason. [3-64-19b, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: On noticing the lingua franca and even the lingua persona of those animals, that
imaginative Lakshmana spoke to his elder brother, alike a striver striving hard for some
information. [3-64-20b, 21a]

Shlok 21a- 22- 23a: "Oh, godly brother, when you have asked these animals, 'where is Seetha,' they
quickly rose to their feet, and as to how they are showing the track on the ground and the southern
direction as well, thereby we may, for sure, go south-westward to know whether there is some
information about her, or else, even that noble lady herself may be available there..." [3-64-21a,
22, 23a]

Shlok 23b- 24a: On saying "Yes!" to Lakshmana that illustrious Rama of Kakutstha sallied forth to
southern direction followed by Lakshmana, scrutinising the earth on his walkway. [3-64-23b,
24a]

Shlok 24b- 25a: Those two brothers who are proceeding while discussing among themselves have seen
the walkway bestrewn with flowers fallen from a person. [3-64-24b, 25a]

Shlok 25b- 26a: That valiant Rama who is anguished to see the drizzle of flowers fallen on the
surface of earth spoke this word to Lakshmana who is equally anguished. [3-64-25b, 26a]

Shlok 26b- 27a: "I recognise these flowers that are fallen here, oh, Lakshmana. In forest I gave
them to Vaidehi and she tucked these very flowers in her bun. [3-64-26b, 27a]

Shlok 27b- 28a: "These flowers are carefully safeguarded by the sun, as they are unwithered yet, by
air as they are unswept by it, and by the glorious earth, as they are unspoilt by that, thus I deem
that these naturals, sun, air, and earth are really proffering a helping hand to me. [3-64-27b,
28a]

Shlok 28b- 29a: On saying thus to best one among men Lakshmana, that virtue-souled and dextrous Rama
asked the mountain that is uproarious with rapids. [3-64-28b, 29a]

Shlok 29b- 30a: "Oh, lord among the earth-bolstered mountains, have you somehow seen a beauty by all
her limbs, foregone by me in beautiful woodlands?" [3-64-29b, 30a]

[Commentary] This question contains a reply to Rama in a sort of jugglery of words / parsing
as in - able was I ere I saw Elba. kshiti bhR^itaam naatha 'of earth, among bolsterers, lord; oh,
lordly bolsterer of earth, oh, king Rama; tvyaa virahitaa 'by you, foregone...' maya dR^iSTaa iti
kaschit, kaschit= kaama pravedane ' by me, seen...'



Reply of mountain to Rama:"Oh, lordly bolsterer of
earth, lord Rama, I have somehow seen a beauty by all her limbs, foregone by you in beautiful
woodlands.'

[Commentary] When the question itself becomes an answer it is citra alankaara and the
mountain gave that reply in an echo of Rama's verbiage. Rama takes this as a mere echo of the
mountain, but not a clear reply, and thus angering at it he wants to splinter it down, as said in
next lines.

Shlok 30b- 31a: Because his question is unanswered he is enraged as with a lion enraging at a puny
animal, and then he spoke to the mountain, "show me that golden tinged, golden limbed Seetha, oh,
mountain, no sooner than I devastate all your apices, apiece..." [3-64-30b, 31]

Shlok 32: When Rama spoke to the mountain in this way, that mountain echoed as if it is
revealing Seetha, but actually it has not revealed Seetha to Raghava. [3-64-32]

[Commentary] When the mountain replied echoing the same words of Rama, Rama deemed it silent
on other account of Seetha, but just said 'I have seen Seetha...' Hence, that mountain said
anything but a proper indication, thus it has dishonoured Rama - Maheshvara Tiirtha. The mountain
appeared to have said something but kept mum on other details - Govindaraja. In either way it
silent on other details for fear of later time atrocity of Ravana, thereby Rama wanted to subject
it to his arrows atrocity, now itself.

Shlok 33- 34a: Then Rama of Dasharatha said to the hefty mountain, "When the infernos of my arrows
will burn you down completely and when you will be pared down ashes, you shall be grassless,
treeless and tender-leafless, and thus you become a meritless mountain... hence, show Seetha before
becoming so... [3-64-33, 34a]

Shlok 34b- 35b: "Lakshmana, if this River Godavari is not going to tell me immediately about that
moonshine-faced Seetha, now I will dry her up... [3-64-34b, 35a]

Shlok 35b- 36- 37a: This way when Rama is highly infuriated and who appeared to burn down anything just
with his eyes, then he has seen on the ground gigantic footprints of a demon, and the footprints of
Vaidehi, who appeared to have run fearfully here and there in a helter-skelter manner expecting the
arrival of Rama, and which footprints are heavily trodden by a demon who followed her. [3-64-35b,
36, 37a]

Shlok 37b- 38: On scrutinising the overly trodden footprints of Seetha and the demon, and a broken
bow, broken quiver, and broken and variously bestrewn chariot also, then Rama became baffle-hearted
and said to his dear brother Lakshmana. [3-64-37b, 38]

Shlok 39: "See Lakshmana, many beads of jewellery and many bits of garlands of Vaidehi have
indeed fallen down, and oh, Soumitri, they are strewn around... [3-64-39]

Shlok 40: "Also the surface of the earth is everywhere interspersed with big and small blood
drops that are akin to golden droplets, you see them Saumitri... [3-64-40]

Shlok 40: "I think Lakshmana, guise changing demons would have ripped and rived Vaidehi, or
divided her into pieces, or they might have gluttonised her. [3-64-41]

Shlok 42: "A deadly clash has occurred here, Soumitri, while two demons were clashing between
themselves on account of Vaidehi... [3-64-42]

Shlok 43- 44a: "Oh, gentle Lakshmana, studded with pearls and gems this great bow of someone is
beautifully decorated, but it is fragmented and fallen to earth. Oh, dear boy, Lakshmana, this bow
may perhaps belong to demons, or else to gods... [3-64-43, 44a]

Shlok 44b- 45a: "Studded with lapis gem beads this golden armour of someone is similar to the rising
sun in its shine, but it is splintered and fallen to earth... [3-64-44b, 45a]

Shlok 45b- 46a: "This hundred-spoked regal-parasol of someone is embellished with divine festoons,
but oh, gentle Lakshmana, its central-shaft is wrecked and it is felled to earth... [3-64-45b,
46a]

Shlok 46b- 47a: "These ghost-faced mules with golden breastplates are macabre in form and massive in
frame, but they are hewed down in war, whose are they, either... [3-64-46b, 47a]

Shlok 47b- 48a: "Somebody's combat-chariot is irradiant and similar in shine to the flaring fire
with a war-pennon, but it is broken and battered down, as well... [3-64-47b, 48a]

Shlok 48b- 49a: "These frightful looking arrows of somebody are gilded and they are as much as a
chariot's axle in their thickness, but their arrowheads are shred and they are manifoldly shredded
and strewn around... [3-64-48, 49a]

[Commentary] The sizes of Ravana's arrows are calculated differently. This ratha aksha maatra
is taken as the length of chariot's wheel and thus it is said four-hundred inches or some 33 feet,
which is unacceptable to some as Ravana did not travel in his chariot with a mega body. In another
way aksha is taken as the 'eye of axle...' Then the diameter of his arrow is said, 'as thick as an
axle...' Some others said the size of arrow is eighty-four inches according to shilpa shaastra
'science of chariot making...' taking this 'eye of axle' into consideration.

Shlok 49b- 50a: "Lakshmana, you see these two quivers packed with arrows are completely shattered,
and the charioteer is drop dead with whip and bridles still in his hands... whose charioteer he
might be! [3-64-49b, 50a]

[Commentary] The word used here for quivers is sharaavara and for this Dr. Satya Vrat says:
'Another word which is also not noticed by Monier Williams is sharaavara. It means an armour kavaca
and occurs at least twice in the Ramayana...' Here and at 3-51-14 of this canto and there it was
used in the meaning of armour. If this meaning of armour is adopted here also, then the meaning of
the above verse may somewhat be,



Lakshmana, you see... these two armours, one belonging to the combatant from this
chariot [that is ripped off by Jataayu and fallen from the body of Ravana,] and the other belonging
to this charioteer, both are encrusted fully with arrows [when Jataayu winnowed the very same
arrows shot by Ravana with both of his wings and thus shot them back,] thus the two armours are
completely shattered... and the charioteer is drop dead with whip and bridles in his hand... either
he... whose is he... and where is the presiding combatant of this chariot....

Shlok 50b- 51a: "Evidently this is the modus operandi of someone who is a male demon, and you see
how my animosity has become hundredfold to eradicate them... [3-64-50b, 51a]

[Commentary] This is the reply to Seetha for she wanted no animosity could be nurtured
towards the demons without a cause, in the opening chapters of this Aranya Kanda. When she herself
became a cause for that animosity, now Rama is indicating the effect of that cause, in saying: 'I
have some animosity towards these demons, but I have not eliminated them sweepingly, but for some
demons occasionally... I thought that Seetha strayed her way, or eaten away by some pauperised
paltry demon... but on seeing the massive footprints I consider this as a calculated and culpable
crime... now that my animosity is multiplied hundredfold, whole of the demonic race will be
eliminated...'

Shlok 51b- 52: "The highly stony-hearted demons that are guise-changers by their wish have either
abducted, or killed or gluttonised saintly Seetha... but, they say that rectitude saves such
saintly persons... yet that rectitude has not saved Seetha while she is being abducted in great
forest... [3-64-51b, 52]

[Commentary] Dharma or Righteousness does not go on safeguarding either its adherents or
antagonists, everyone, everywhere, everlastingly. dharmo rakshati rakshitaH and suchlike sayings
are also time-bound and when the time is negative aapatsu raksha ko dharmaH 'in difficulties which
rightness safeguards?' is the ensuing dilemma.

Shlok 53: "Whether Vaidehi is taken away or taken in by some unknown being, oh, gentle
Lakshmana, then who are the gods who can possibly be benignant to me in this world... [3-64-53]

[Commentary] 'No god can possibly be non-benignant to me, either in this world or in the
other...' Govindaraja.

Shlok 54: "Lakshmana, someone, even if He were a Creator of Worlds, or an Omnipotent, if He
were to be lenient at heart or in His actions, He will be disrespected by all beings, owing to the
unenlightenment of those beings... [3-64-54]

Shlok 55: "I who am mellowly, magnanimous, merciful and yoked only to the wellbeing of all
worlds, such as I am, all of the heavenly gods deem me as non-Omnipotent... it is definite...
[3-64-55]

[Commentary] Annex: 'Even if I am capable of creating, maintaining, and destructing all the
worlds, I am lenient, for I am benevolent... but the unwise are unable to know me, the real me...
evil-doers are reverenced by one and all, though negatively owing to scare... but a do-gooder is
scoffed off, for his deeds are positive and do not yield quick and instant results... and my
Omnipotence is looked down as my impotence...' This concept is amplified throughout Bhagavat
Gita.

Shlok 56- 57: "Have you seen Lakshmana how merits like mercifulness, magnanimity and the like are
inverted to become demerits on getting at me, thus I am unmerited in forgoing Seetha. As such, as
with the sizzle of sun uprisen quelling all the moonshine, now you may see as to how my irradiance
radiates quelling all the merits like softness and fairness for the nonentity of all beings
proactive to demons, inclusive of demons. [3-64-56, 57]

Shlok 58: "Oh, Lakshmana, will the yaksha-s be comfortable now, no; gandharva-s - no; monsters
- no; demons - no; either kinnaraa-s or humans - no, none can be comfortable henceforth...
[3-64-58]

Shlok 59: "Now the welkin will be packed with my arrows and missiles, and I will render it as
an impassable sphere for the treaders in the triad of worlds... [3-64-59]

Shlok 60- 61- 62a: "I will make the triad of worlds quiescent by completely blockading all the
planetary bodies. The night-maker moon will be barricaded, aurae of fire, air and sun will be
devastated, and then everything will be overcast with darkness. Mountaintops will be completely
pulverised, water receptacles will be dried out, and trees, creeping-plants and shrubberies will be
destroyed, and oceans depleted, thus I will bring the triad of the worlds to nought, relative to
the task of Time in extinguishing an era... [3-64-60, 61, 62a]

Shlok 62b- 63a: "If the gods are not going to safely restore Seetha to me, oh, Soumitri, they can
see what my blitzkrieg is, at this very moment... [3-64-62b, 63a]

Shlok 63b- 64a: "All beings cannot fly high in the sky, oh, Lakshmana, as there will be a labyrinth
of my arrows released from my bowstring, minus an intercolumniation... [3-64-63b, 64a]

Shlok 64b- 65a: "Bombarded with my iron-shafts this world will be put to disorderliness, Lakshmana,
you may now witness how the animals and birds will be dazed and devastated... [3-64-64b, 65a]

Shlok 65b- 66a: "Because of Maithili I will render this mortal world de-demonical, de-phantasmal by
force-stretching my unstoppable arrows up to my ears to release them forcefully... [3-64-65b,
66a]

Shlok 66b- 67: "Let the gods witness now the impact of the blaze-crested, thoroughgoing arrows of
mine, projected by my wrath and released by my irascibility... [3-64-66b, 67a]

Shlok 67b- 68: "That being so, when the triad of worlds is completely ruined by my anger will there
be gods, no; demons - no; phantoms - no, none can survive... [3-64-67b, 68a]

Shlok 68b- 69a: "Whatever worlds of gods, or monsters, or even those of demons are there, they will
be splintered and falling down apiece by the fusillades of my arrows... [3-64-68b, 69a]

Shlok 69b- 70a: "Whether she is abducted, or even if she is killed, oh, Soumitri, if the gods are
not going to give back my Seetha I will now jeopardise these worlds with my arrows... [3-64-69b,
70a]

Shlok 70b- 71: "If my ladylove is not returned indeed in a fine fettle as she was before my running
after Golden Deer, I will be annihilating the triad of world in its entirety, together with its
mobile and sessile beings, and I will be sweltering the entire universe with my arrows as long as I
am not going to get a glimpse of her." Thus Rama gave a vent to his feelings. [3-64-70b, 71a]

Shlok 71: Rama on saying thus with his eyes reddening in fury, his lappet-fold of lips jerking
spasmodically, he girded up his jute-cloths and deerskin and twined up the mass of his matted-hair.
[3-64-72]

Shlok 73: When the disposition of that venturesome and infuriated Rama has become in that way
holocaustic, it is like that of Rudra, the All-Inflamer god, when He became like this in earlier
times, intending to inflame the Triple-Cities. [3-64-73]

Shlok 74- 75: On saying so that illustrious Rama, the delighter of world, grabbed his bow from
Lakshmana and gripped it tightly, unholstered a deadly and dazzling arrow from his quiver which is
like a poisonous serpent, and readying it on the bowstring of his bow, that Rama, the vanquisher of
enemies fastnesses, who looked like the Ear-End-Fire, spoke this sentence. [3-64-74, 75]

Shlok 76: "As to how all the created beings cannot counteract the ageing, dying, fate and the
Time at anytime, likewise I too am non-countervailed, when I am coalesced with fury, no doubt about
it..." [3-64-76]

[Commentary] Time is the all-transcending factor and none can countervail it. anena mR^ityu
jara aadayoH ashakya pratiikaaraa iti suucitam | tathaa ca droNa parvaaNi - na hi eSha brahma
caryeNa na veda adhyayanena ca | na kriyaabhiH na ca astreNa mR^ityoH kashcin nivartayate | kruura
sarva vinaashaaya kaalo asau na ati vartate | mahaa bhaarata - dk

Shlok 77: "If that princess of Mithila, who has suavely and toothy smiles and who causes
irreproachability to my character if only I can have a glimpse of her, is not returned to me in
fine fettle as she was when she was with me, then I will countermove whole of this universe
together with its gods, immortals, humans, florae and faunas, mountains and waters... and
whatnot... [3-64-77]



SARGA 65
------------------------------

[Text] Lakshmana pacifies Rama with reasonable argument in saying that, owing to the felony
committed by a single soul, the entire world cannot be put to arrow. But a humanly search is to be
conducted first to find him out, who abducted Seetha. If she is unavailable even after a thorough
search, then that which is appropriate to the situation obtaining then, it can be effectuated.

Shlok 1: Lakshmana on seeing Rama who is searing and careworn owing to the abduction of
Seetha, blazing like the doomsday inferno, twinned with the notion of rendering the worlds into
nonentity, kenning at his stringed bow, keen to blaze away entire universe, suspiring again and
again, and who is alike Rudra at the end of era, and whose highly infuriated persona Lakshmana has
not seen previously, became pale-faced and spoke to Rama with folded palms. [3-65-1]

Shlok 4: "Previously, you were self-collected and self-controlled and delighted in the
wellbeing of all the beings. But presently, slipping into fury you are discarding your own
disposition, which is unapt of you... [3-65-4]

Shlok 5: "Grandeur in moon, splendour in sun, motion in wind, and composure in earth are
perpetual and all this perpetuity is available in you, besides an unexcelled honour... [3-65-5]

Shlok 6- 7a: "It will be unapt of you to vandalise worlds for a single-soul's felony. It is
unclear as to whose combat-chariot is this, or by whom, or by what reason it is shattered with its
weaponry and paraphernalia... [3-65-6, 7a]

Shlok 7b- 8a: "This has become a very ghastly place since it is grooved by the hooves of ungulates
and by the felloies of chariot-wheels, and it is wetted with drops of blood, oh, prince, thereby a
combat is fought and stalled at this place... [3-65-7b, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: "This is just a solo-combatant's combat but not among duo, oh, best articulator one
among best articulators, I indeed observe that no huge army is eventuated here, nor its stamp...
[3-65-8b, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: "It will be inapt of you to wish for wrecking a havoc upon all worlds for an
individual's wrongdoing. Why because, the good-hearted, good-natured kings are they who impose
tenable punishment... [3-65-9b, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: "You are always the shelterer for all beings, for you're above all the good-natured
and good-hearted ordinary kings, and who can really deem the ravagement of you wife as an act of
grace... [3-65-10b, 11a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: "As no altruist can evoke indignation in a hallowed person who is performing
Vedic-ritual, honestly, these rivers, oceans, mountains, gods, celestials, and cacodemons too
cannot evoke indignation in you, because they are always gentle to you... isn't so... [3-65-10b,
11a]

Shlok 12b- 13a: "Oh, king, it will be apt of you to wield your bow and search for him who abducted
Seetha, along with me as your squire and standby, and with the help of sublime sages available in
this forest... [3-65-12b, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: "Let us search the oceans, rivers and forests, and even divers dreadful caves and
different lotus-lakes... [3-65-13b, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: "Let us intently search the worlds of gods and celestials as long as the abductor of
your wife is unapprehended... [3-65-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b: "Oh, Lord of Kosala kingdom, if the heavenly lords are not going bestow your wife
propitiously, rather after our humanly effort, then you may do whatever you want, seasonably...
[3-65-15b, c]

Shlok 16: "If, oh, king, you with your traits of sincerity, solidarity, simplicity, and
scrupulosity are not going to get back Seetha, then you may you may put whole of the universe to
turmoil with the torrents of your arrows which have swift egress as they are with golden-handles
which are stuffed with eagle feathers, and which mirror up the Thunderbolts of Mahendra in their
trajectories..." Thus Lakshmana appealed to ireful Rama. [3-65-16]



SARGA 66
------------------------------

[Text] Lakshmana reasons with Rama regarding the drastic action Rama is about to take in
annihilating the worlds. He says many pithy references in dissuading Rama. This chapter likens to
Bhagavad Gita, as its terse version.

Shlok 1- 2: While Rama is bewailing like a forlorn as his anguish is scorching him, rendered
impoverished with an inanimate heart as a high passion possessed him, Lakshmana, the son of
Sumitra, suppliantly gripped his feet and started to address him. [4-66-1, 2]

Shlok 3: "Oh, Rama, as gods have reaped ambrosia after a prolonged churning of Milky Ocean,
you are a reap of King Dasharatha's superlative ascesis and even by his superior acts...
[4-66-3]

[Commentary] The comparison of Rama to ambrosia is noteworthy. Ambrosia is not self-useful
but it is manifoldly useful to every other being. If Rama is useful to all created, animate, or
inanimate beings, inclusive of gods, and the thought of that prime mover to destruct what it is
moving, is self-contradictory. Next, the prime object of ambrosia is to enliven but not to
eradicate, thus that thought itself is self-contemptuous. Next, the very same demons turned
destructive from day one, and now if Rama destructs everything, it tantamount to brand Rama to have
taken sides with demons. This is again a self-critical phenomenon of his incarnation. And so
on...

Shlok 4: "Our father was an enlivener of all the subjects and that king was beholden only to
your rosy endowments, but he obtained godhood by your separation... this is what we heard from
Bharata... [4-66-4]

[Commentary] Annex: 'You know that our father fought demons on behalf of gods and was an
ablest and an impeccable ruler... and you said that our father might deride you in saying: 'you are
a wilful disobedient, despicable and even that way a dishonest one, such as you are, fie on you...'
[as at 3-61-8b, 9a,] but when you resort to undertake still deplorable devastation of worlds, than
that of demons, what will he say of you...

Shlok 5: "If you are unable to withstand this anguish chanced on you, oh, Kakutstha, then how
a simpleton and whose boldness is meagre can withstand it... [4-66-5]

[Commentary] Annex: 'Kakutstha-s are the pure beings shuddha sattva, and you are still purer,
because of the speciality of your birth through some divine dessert given by some yaGYa puruSa, a
Ritual Deity, therefore you should have some divine endowments, if not all, and why do you compare
yourself to a commoner and bewail like this, instead of making humanly efforts... and if a person
of your stature sits bewailing and moaning, whereto a commoner has to go in a similar
situation...

Shlok 6: "Oh, first and foremost man, tell me who is uncaught by mischance, which mischance
will be catchy like fire-catch, and oh, king, even that, that lets up momently... [4-66-6]

[Commentary] Annex: 'I am not imparting any maiden version of Bhagavad Gita to you in saying
that gataasuuna agataa suunau na anushocanti panNDitaaH; maatraa sparshaH tu kaunteya shiita uSNam
sukha duHkhadaa... Gita 2-11, 13; 'This that irks- / Thy sense-life, thrilling to the elements- /
Bringing thee heat and cold, sorrows and joys, / 'Tis brief and mutable!' but we are in an era of
action, let us undertake some action, rather than bewailing... all this is but brief and
mutable...' but think yourself, what to do next, in a human way...'

Shlok 7: "If you are going to blaze away worlds with your radiance in your ruefulness, to
where the ordinary people in rue shall go for solace, really... [4-66-7]

[Commentary] Annex: 'A farmer fences his farm to not to allow stray cattle to graze the
crop... you are an implicit farmer of this universe and you alone fenced this universe with their
respective protective areas or spheres, say stratosphere, troposphere and suchlike... thus you have
come here explicitly as a fence to this world, and when the fence alone is trampling the crop of
the rightness, who else will come to the rescue of that forlorn elements of crop, called the
inmates of worlds...'

Shlok 8: "World's disposition is this way only, even if Nahusha, the son Yayaati, has become
an egalitarian with Indra, writhe touched him off... [4-66-8]

[Commentary] Yayaati attains heaven after performing many Vedic-rituals. But when Indra asked
Yayaati 'who is the best personality in your kingdom?' Yayaati, as a straightforward person replied
'I am the best in my kingdom...' Then Indra said 'Self-eulogisers have no place in heaven, hence
you return to mortal worlds...' thus Yayaati met with a mischance. Instead of telling as Yayaati,
he is said to be the 'son of Nahusha' which expression suggests disobedience. Once Nahusha made the
Seven Sages, the stars in Ursa Major, as the bearers of his palanquin and hastened them saying
sarpa, sarpa... where that word means 'move fast, move fast...' besides its general meaning
'serpent...' Then Sage Agastya curses Nahusha, 'be like that...' i.e., 'become a serpent...' taking
the general meaning of that word. Then Nahusha, though a renowned personality, for he is accursed
he had to fall supine as a big serpent. So Lakshmana is obliquely suggesting Rama, 'you may be a
god supreme... but it is in your realm... not on earth... on earth you have to behave like an
earthling... wrecking the system from within is meaningless... have some obedience to the set
order...'

Shlok 9: "Which great sage Vashishta is there, who is also the priest of our father, he
parented a hundred sons in one day and like that they are all eliminated in one day by Vishvamitra,
for which Vashishta also lamented, but not for a long... [4-66-9]

[Commentary] Annex: 'world's disposition is such, a hundred living beings may take birth on
one day and even die in hundreds, or thousands in one day... birth entails death... you ordained it
to be so, but when the problem has come right under your seat, you go on bewailing without
undertaking humanly effort... is this befitting...'

Shlok 10: "This Mother Earth who is the mother of worlds and venerated by all animate and
inanimate, or even celestial beings, oh, king of Kosala kingdom, even she undergoes tremors and
earthquakes... [4-66-10]

[Commentary] Mother earth is not only held as a mother of living beings on her surface, but
even Moon, Mars etc., planets are said to have emerged from her, and she is lone female in
planetary system capable enough to produce offspring, and hence she is regarded as the wife of
Vishnu, and hence Vishnu has to incarnate Himself on her periodically, to ease her of her problems.
As such 'your weeping for your loss is subjective, while putting your other wife, namely bhuu devi,
Mother Earth, to suffering by earthquakes, storms, whirlwinds, twisters, and what not... is it
appropriate of you to make her suffer periodically, while you say that your one-time-suffering such
as this one is nonpareil... or what... world's disposition is as such... not even you can change
it, lest it boomerangs...'

Shlok 11: "Which duteous pair is the pair of eyes of the world in whom all the systems of
world are peremptory, though that pair of Sun and Moon are doughtily influential in this solar
system, eclipse draws nigh of them... [4-66-11]

[Commentary] Annex: 'for a while you stop thinking that you as Vishnu are reclining on me,
aadi sheeSha the Divine-Thousand-hooded-serpent-recline-bed of Vishnu in vaikuNTha, yon the
dwaadasha aadtya-s, 'Eleven Suns' and numerous Moons of this Universes... you are now right under
the nose of this solar system, and on earth... and in this solar system there is none supreme than
this mighty sun, and mellowly moon, a pair of eyes of this system, where one opens one's eye by day
and the other closes that eye with his cooling effect by night... and it is also said in Veda-s:
aadityaat jaayate
vR^iShTiH - vR^iShTiH tato annam abhijaayate - candramasau oShadhi vanaspatau
'Sun causes rains, rains cause food, Moon causes herbs and plants of condiments...' and even they,
they are eclipsed occasionally, for they are around the mortal world... and what if, your anguish
eclipses you, temporarily...'

Shlok 12: "Even very great incorporates like earth and suchlike planets, oh, bullish man, or
even the gods, or even all corporeal beings, cannot get release from the predestine of Supreme
Being... [4-66-12]

[Commentary] This verse is held as an interpolate or the problem with copyists, by the use of
the word bhuutaani twice, and even the last compound is said to be self-contradictory sarva
bhuutaani dehinaH or sarva bhuutaadi dehinaH Hence it is up to the grammarians to decide. Some mms
use vedaaH for devaaH in first foot, thus 'even all Veda-s put together cannot transcend the
Absolute...'

Shlok 13: "Oh, tigerly-man, we hear that whether gods like Indra et al., are ethical and/or
unethical, yet they too have the resultant agonies and ecstasies... hence, it is inapt of you to
fret thyself... [4-66-13]

[Commentary] The last compound in second foot na tvam vyathitum arhasi is the 'theme
instruction' in Gita na tvam shocitum arhasi which again appears in the next verse. This has a near
psalm in The Bible: 'Fret not thyself because of the ungodly...' Psalm 37, v 1.

Shlok 14: "Whether Vaidehi is stolen or slain, oh, brave one, it will be inapt of you sadden
like this as with any other commoner without tracking her whereabouts... [4-66-14]

Shlok 15: "Persons of your like who are always equable in their outlook, oh, Rama, they will
remain non-dispirited even if they are undergoing desperate straits, and they will not just sadden
like this... [4-66-15]

Shlok 16: "Oh, foremost man among men, you ratiocinate in subtle pursuit, objectively and
brainily, and great brains will comprehend good and bad in subtlety with their braininess...
[4-66-16]

Shlok 17: "Indiscernible are the rights and wrongs of actions, and indefinite are the
cherished fruits of those actions, and without performing any action, fruits also will be
nonexistent... [4-66-17]

[Commentary] Vividly: We cannot discern the rights or wrongs of any action we perform now in
this lifetime, nor we can recollect the actions done us in earlier births, to asses their rights or
wrongs. And they are indefinite and infirm, because any action we perform it ceases to exist on its
competition. And if we have not performed such an action in last birth, conducive to yield good
result in this birth, its fruition is nonexistent. Thereby we may perhaps muse over our actions
basing on the results occurring now. In any case, nonexistent is the fruits of action, may it be
right or wrong, if there is inaction. This is according to Govindaraja. He uses word a dhR^itaanaam
'infirm' for a dhR^ivaaNaam 'indefinite' and Tilaka uses word ca vartate 'also, happens' for
pravartate 'will be in existence' and in either way the meaning is the same. anena praaptam
sukham duHkham vaa puurva karma adhiinam iti uktam - tathaa ca bhaarate - aaraNyake - yaani
praapnoti puruShaH tat phalam puurva karmaaNaam | dhaataa api hi sva karmaiva taiH taiH hetubhiH
iishvaraH || dk

[Commentary] Another way of declining the meaning is by ellipting the words from previous
verse buddhyaa yuktaa 'with braininess' as below:



"The great brains with their braininess are clearly comprehending the indiscernible,
indefinite or infirm rights and wrongs of their actions, thus they translate their thinking into
action... and thus they are undertaking humanly possible action... but not sitting back, unlike
you...

[Commentary] There is another shade to this verse with some altered verbiage as below:



Oh, brave one, to those that are interested in endeavours, whether or not they are
uninterested in the results of their actions, either rights or wrongs, but even to them cherished
fruits does not occur, effortlessly...

[Commentary] And the commentaries go on expanding these tenets, till this chapter vies with
Bhagavad Gita.

Shlok 18: "Oh valiant one, indeed you alone have said this way to me previously and
repeatedly, who really can profess you even he were to be professedly the Jupiter... [4-66-18]

Shlok 19: "Oh, great discerner, your thinking process is non-explicatory even to gods, but now
that thinking process is obliquely and utterly slumberous owing to your sadness, hence I am
addressing your percipience and this is no schoolteaching... [4-66-19]

Shlok 20: "Oh, foremost one among Ikshvaku, oh, Rama, contemplate the divineness of those
immortals and their pure being in maintaining world order, also consider the humanness of these
mortals and their helpless susceptibility to pain, also count on your own valour that which can
annihilate the whole of anything... and then come to conclusion whether or not to annihilate
everything... but, before that try hard to eliminate the abuser, lest he may abuse many others...
[4-66-20]



"Oh, best one among Ikshvaku-s, oh, Rama, contemplate the divine valour you have
derived, also consider the human valour you have inherited, also count on your own innate valour...
hence, try hard to eliminate the abuser...

[Commentary] The second meaning is when 'valour' is taken as main principle. This verse has
another shade if the compound in first foot is read as, according to some other ancient mms: divyam
ca maanuSam ca astram aatmanaH ca paraakramam | where the word aatmanaH is replaced with astram and
then the meaning is 'you have missiles unknown to humans and you also have missiles unknown even to
gods, by the courtesy of Vishvamitra and Agastya, and you have your own valour, then try hard for
the abuser...'

Shlok 21: "Oh, best one among men, what is it you gain on performing a complete annihilation
owing to a single soul's malefaction, hence, mark him... that malefactor and a malevolent of yours,
and it will be apt of you to uproot him... him alone... [4-66-21]



SARGA 67
------------------------------

[Text] Rama spots Jataayu, whose wings are hacked and who is breathless, and is in his last
moments. On conceding to the suggestion of Lakshmana that they should search for Seetha, they start
searching the forest and at certain place the mountainous Jataayu is seen. Mistaking him to be a
demon Rama wants to kill and speedily approaches Jataayu, but on listening Jataayu's words, Rama
recognises and laments for his wretched situation.

Shlok 1: Even though Rama is elder to Lakshmana he gleaned the ultimate tenor of Lakshmana's
words when Lakshmana just said them expediently because Raghava is a best gleaner of the gist of
advises. [3-67-1]

[Commentary] If the advice is with ideation it can be taken form youngsters... yukti yuktam vaco
graahyam baalaat api subhaaShitam | tathaa ca - anena baalot iiritam api yuktam vaco graahyam iti
uktam - tathaa ca bhaarate udyoge - viduraH - api unmatta pralaapato baalaacca parisarpitaH |
sarvataH saaram aadadyaat ashmabhya iva kaancanam || iti - dk 'youngsters advices
can be taken like gold from the coals...'

Shlok 2: Such as he is that dextrous Rama on controlling his highly heightening fury,
propping against his bedazzling bow spoke this to Lakshmana. [3-67-2]

Shlok 3: "What is to be done by us, oh, dear boy... or, whereto we might go, or, by which
device Seetha is discernable... Lakshmana, now you think of it, clearly... [3-67-3]

Shlok 4- 5a: To such a Rama who is tormented by anguish, Lakshmana said, "it will be apt of you
to search this Janasthaana alone which is rife with many demons, and replete with manifold trees
and climber-plants... [3-67-4]

Shlok 5b- 6: "Here there are unclimbable mountains, glens and glyphs as well. There are divers
and pernicious caverns tumultuous with diverse packs of predators, and here are the mansions of
kinnaraa-s and palaces of gandharva-s, as well... [3-67-5b, 6]

Shlok 7- 8a: "It will be apt of you to steadfastly search in them along with me, and oh, best one
among men, your sort of literati and clever-souls will be unfluctuating in calamities like the
mountains unfluctuating in windstorms..." Lakshmana said so Rama. [3-67-6, 7, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: When Lakshmana said in this way to that ireful Rama, he roved entire forest along
with Lakshmana readying a crescent-shaped razor-sharp deadly arrow on his bow. [3-67-8b, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: Then Rama beheld Jataayu who is akin to a mountaintop in his gleam, and a best
beatific brave bird among all the birds, but bloodstained and buckling on earth. [3-67-9b, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: On beholding him who is like a mountaintop in his gleam, Rama said to Lakshmana,
"This one has gluttonised Seetha, the princess from Vaidehi, there is no doubt about it...
[3-67-10b, 11a]

[Commentary] 

Shlok 11b- 12: "It is apparent that this demon skulks in the forest in the semblance of an eagle,
and having gluttonised that wide-eyed Seetha he is now reposing comfortably. I will eliminate him
with deadly arrows, whose arrowheads blaze away and which shoot off straightly..." Thus Rama
declared. [3-67-11b, 12]

Shlok 13: On saying thus and on readying a crescent-shaped razor-sharp deadly arrow on his
bow, that ireful Rama rushed towards the eagle, as though to a-tremble the whole of the earth that
which is within the perimeter of oceans. [3-67-13]

Shlok 14: But that bird spewing up frothy blood pathetically appealed to such an ireful son of
Dasharatha, namely Rama, in a pathetic tone. [3-67-14]

[Commentary] Jataayu is firstly recollecting his friend Dasharatha on his deathbed, then he
recounts this Rama as that Dasharatha's son, and hence, the epithet to Rama is
non-non-essential.

Shlok 15: "Oh, boy Rama, blest is your eternality, for whom you are searching as with the
search of a rejuvenescent herb in the vast of forest, Ravana stole that lady and my lives, too...
[3-67-15]

Shlok 16: "I have seen that lady while being stolen by brute-forced Ravana when you and even
Lakshmana absented from her... [3-67-16]

Shlok 17: "I outreached to rescue Seetha... and in a combat Ravana is rendered as one with
utterly battered chariot... and I felled him and that chariot there... onto earth's surface...
[3-67-17]

[Commentary] Some mms use Chatram 'parasol...' for the word atra for 'there...' and prabho
'oh, lord...' for mayaa 'by me...'

Shlok 18: "This one is his fragmented bow and this is his fragmented armour... oh, Rama, this
is his combat-chariot... which, in combat shattered by me... [3-67-18]

[Commentary] Some mms use prabho 'oh, lord...' for etat and sharaaH tathaa 'arrows like that'
for sharaavaram 'armour...'

Shlok 19: "This is his charioteer drop dead onto earth by my wings... when I am overtired
Ravana gashed my wings and flew skyward taking Seetha of Videha kingdom with him, and it will be
inapt of you to kill me who am already killed by the demon..." Thus Jataayu appealed to Rama.
[3-67-19, 20]

Shlok 21: Rama jettisoned his forceful bow when he heard the much desired news about Seetha
while hugging that kingly eagle Jataayu. [3-67-21]

Shlok 22: Even though Rama is comparatively a bold person he involuntarily fell down to
ground, as the onefold scorch of anguish for Seetha is doubled by this predicament of Jataayu, and
he wept over Jataayu. [3-67-22]

[Commentary] Rama's weeping is real or unreal, is a haunted notion for commentators. Here
also he is weeping over. For this Maheshvara Tiirtha says that he weeps and bewails when his
adherents are ill at ease. In Ayodhya vyasaneShu
manuShyaaNaa~N bhR^isha~N bhavati duHkhitaH || utsaveShu ca sarveShu piteva parituShyati |
2-2-40 'Rama feels very sad towards afflictions of men, and feels delighted in
all functions celebrated by people on the occasions of child birth and the like, just as their own
father does...' So, it must be true in respect of Seetha, even. This is agreeable to Govindaraja,
too.

Shlok 23: Jataayu is supine on a single-strait passable for a single-person and he is
suspiring for several times, and on seeing such Jataayu Rama became anguished and spoke this to
Soumitri. [3-67-23]

[Commentary] Here the words ekaayane kR^irChre may mean differently. kR^iChre
'difficultly...' ekaayane 'one-way breathing, breathing in, inhaling difficultly...' and this way
of juxtaposing words, 'Jataayu is struggling for a breath...' would mean more near to the scene,
than a single-strait, or a narrow pathway, which are not uncommon in forests.

Shlok 24: "Mislaid is my kingdom and I am mislocated into forests, Seetha is misplaced and now
this mischance of death on this bird... this kind of misfortune of mine incinerates even Agni, the
Divine-Incinerator... [3-67-24]

Shlok 25: "Even if it were to be a plethoric and limitless ocean, and now if I were to enter
it, or take a swim to the other shore of blissfulness, even that Lord of Rivers runs completely
dry, owing to my misfortune, it is definite... [3-67-25]

Shlok 26: "There will not be any greater unfortunate being in this world than me, even if all
the sessile and mobile beings are put together, by whom such a complicated catastrophic enmeshment
as this is derived... [3-67-26]

Shlok 27: "This decrepit kingly eagle is the friend of my father who is terminally gashed and
recumbent on the floor owing only to the backlash of my fortune..." So lamented Rama for the
wounded eagle Jataayu. [3-67-27]

[Commentary] Some mms use the word mahaa balaH 'great mighty' eagle king, while others use
jaraanvita 'old aged, decrepit...' for a pathetic touch.

Shlok 28: Thus, lamenting in that way for many times Raghava patted the body of Jataayu along
with Lakshmana instancing his parental regard. [3-67-28]

Shlok 29: On hugging that kingly eagle whose wings are hacked off and who is bloodstained, and
on uttering this much, "she who is identical with my lives,... where is that Maithili..." Rama
collapsed to earth. [3-67-29]



SARGA 68
------------------------------

[Text] Jataayu names Ravana as the abductor of Seetha while breathing his last. Though he struggles hard to 
say what all has happened, the Time called death takes him away, at such a time when the important information 
is about to be said to Rama. Receiving that much information at least, Rama consigns Jataayu to funeral 
fire, like his own relative and performs other rites, and then proceeds for searching Seetha.

Shlok 1: Rama on seeing that eagle felled to ground by the atrocious Ravana, said this sentence to Soumitri who 
is an asset for good companionability. [3-68-1]

Shlok 2: "While this bird is venturing in my concern the demon felled him in combat and he is leaving off his 
lives owing to me, definitely... [3-68-2]

Shlok 3: "Obviously, lives in his body are very feeble, oh, Lakshmana, it is natural, isn't it, and he looks 
highly anguished with a dulled voice..." Thus on saying to Lakshmana, Rama then spoke to Jataayu. [3-68-3]

Shlok 4: "Oh, Jataayu, if you are in fine fettle to further reiterate words, relate about Seetha, let safe betide 
you, and recount how you are murdered, too... [3-68-4]

Shlok 5: "What is the reason for Ravana in stealing that noblewoman, and even what is the wrong I have committed 
in his respect, keeping which in view that Ravana stole my ladylove... [3-68-5]

Shlok 6: "How was that moon similar heart-stealing face of hers at that time of abduction, oh, best bird, and 
even what are the words she uttered when being abducted... [3-68-6]

Shlok 7: "What is his stamina of that demon? What is his form? And what are his strategies? And where is his 
stronghold? Oh, sire, tell me while I ask you inquisitively..." Rama urged Jataayu thus for information. 
[3-68-7]

Shlok 8: Then that warm-hearted Jataayu with his eyes rolling upwards saw Rama and with a fluttery voice said 
this sentence to Rama who is wailing like an orphan. [3-68-8]

Shlok 9: "Resorting to his illusionistic devices like creating an immense and tumultuous windstorm and cloud-cover, 
the flagitious chief of demons Ravana abducted Seetha... [3-68-9]

[Commentary] Annex: 'he created such illusion only to render me unsteady in my flight combat... and for his escape 
in the dark of the day...'

Shlok 10: "That night walker hacked both my wings when I was overtired, and went southward taking the princess 
of Videha, Seetha, along with him... [3-68-10]

Shlok 11: "My sight is spinning and my lives are stifled, oh, Raghava, I am now seeing golden trees with cuscus 
grass as their treetops... [3-68-11]

[Commentary] The cuscus grass is the aromatic fibrous root of an Indian grass, Vetiveria zizanaoides, used for making 
fans, screens, etc., Urdu kaskas. This odd combination of trees of gold, instead of wood, and grass 
instead of leaves, is an omen of death.

Shlok 12- 13a: "In which spell of time Ravana has gone taking away Seetha, that spell is named as Vinda... if any riches 
are lost during that spell, the original possessor of those riches will repossess them very quickly... 
oh, Kakutstha, he that Ravana is unmindful of that fact and stole Seetha only to loose her... [3-68-12, 
13a]

[Commentary] The daytime has fifteen spells of time that have their own effects on humans. The fifteen are: raudraH 
svetaH maitraH ca tathaa saarabhaTaH smR^itaH | saavitro vaishvadevaH ca gaandharva kutapaH tathaa | 
rauhiNaH tilaka caiva vijato naiR^iitiH tathaa | shambaro vaaruNaH ca eva bhagaH pa~nca dasha smR^itaH 
|| and the Vijaya said above is also called as 'Vinda,' the eleventh spell of the day. bindo 
naama bindu gulikaH | tasmin samaye aarabdham kaaryam kartuH vipariitem bhavati iti suucitam | tathaa 
ca - utpala parimale gauii prakaraNe - manvarka digdantirasaabdhi netraa suuryasya vaara aadi viShaa 
muhuurtaaH | gargamarendraadi muniidraadibR^indaiH te ninditaaH karmasu bindasa~nj~naaH || - iti - dk
Any action initiated in this spell of the day entails adverse effects, in so far as that aim and 
action of the initiator. Ravana, though an eminent astrologer, and though he is said to have written 
an astrological treatise called raavaNa samhita, did not care about it.

Shlok 13b: "On stealing your ladylove Janaki, that chief of demons, Ravana, will ruin himself, as with a fish which 
swallows a baited fishhook... [3-68-13b, c]

Shlok 14: "Impractical is your anguishing for the daughter of Janaka, as you will delight yourself with Vaidehi 
in no time, on killing that Ravana in the vanguard of a war..." Thus saying Jataayu paused for a while. 
[3-68-14]

Shlok 15: Though Jataayu is speaking on to Rama with an alert mind, blood freely flowed from his mouth with shreds 
of flesh as death verged on him, even then he struggled to say. [3-68-15]

Shlok 16: "That demon is the son of Vishravasa... literally... the brother of Kubera..." on saying thus, that 
lord of birds released his lives, which are unobtainable for oneself. [3-68-16]

[Commentary] Information about Ravana is given here in the first stanza of the verse, in a half-way-through manner. 
And the character of Jataayu itself is evanished by a jump cut of the couplet, only to be filled by 
his brother Sampaati in the later parts of Kishkindha Kanda. In between these two stanzas of one verse, 
where one brother says one stanza, the other by another, the episodes of Kishkindha come to take part. 
The second foot just contains the name of Lanka where Ravana dwells. But it is not said here for dramatic 
effect and for the flow of epic through its own course. Further, Jataayu is not 'dead' but he released 
his lives. And he is safeguarding his lives so far, only to tell Rama. For this Skanda Puraana says 
that Seetha blesses Jataayu to live until Rama comes to him, and listens form Jataayu. But she did not 
stipulate as to how much Rama has to listen or how much Jataayu has to report. devii maa~N praahaH 
raajendra yaavat sambhaaShaNam mama | bhavataH taavat aasan me praaNaa iti aaha jaanakii || Maheshvara 
Tiirtha. So, the bird called life flew away for bird Jataayu...

Shlok 17: But the lives of Jataayu departing from his body went into thin air before the very eyes of Rama who 
is still speaking to him with folded-palms, "tell... tell more..." [3-68-17]

Shlok 18: Jataayu flopped his head on earth, sprawled his feet on ground, and then his body collapsed onto the 
surface of earth writhing jerkily. [3-68-18]

Shlok 19: He who is worsened by very many mishaps that Rama, on seeing the mountainous eagle whose eyes are bloodshot 
and whose lives have gone, said this way to Soumitri... [3-68-19]

Shlok 20: "This bird which for years together lived fearlessly in Dandaka forest, a habitat of demons, that bird 
wilted to death, because of me... [3-68-20]

Shlok 21: "He who has longevity over many years, who actively strived for a long for rectitude, he is now killed 
and prostrating before the Time, because of me... alas... it is indeed impossible to infringe the Time... 
[3-68-21]

Shlok 22: "Lakshmana, this eagle which has dashed to rescue Seetha in order to render help to me is slain by that 
brute-forced Ravana, only because of me, you see... [3-68-22]

Shlok 23: "On abandoning great empire of eagles belonging to his father and forefathers this lord of bird has 
now abandoned his lives too, only for my sake... [3-68-23]

Shlok 24: "Universally noticeable are the protective, prepotent, principled ones that are the followers of probity, 
oh, Soumitri, even though their births are avian or bestial... [3-68-24]

Shlok 25: "To me, oh, enemy-inflamer, oh, gentle Lakshmana, anguish caused by Seetha's abduction is not that much, 
when compared with the anguish caused by the perish of this eagle, that too, because of me... [3-68-25]

Shlok 26: "As to how the celebrated and highly renowned king Dasharatha is venerable and honourable for me, likewise 
this lord of birds is also a venerable and honourable one to me... [3-68-26]

Shlok 27: "Oh, Soumitri, get the firewood and I will produce fire by friction of two sticks, as I wish to cremate 
this lord of birds who expired because of me... [3-68-27]

[Commentary] The fire produced in ritual acts is called araNi where a small concavity is made on one stick, and a 
pointed end to the other, and this pointed end is rubbed in churning mode in the concavity of the other 
stick, and then both the dry wood-sticks give out a small fire, which then is taken on cotton, to lit 
a huge pyre.

Shlok 28: "Oh, Soumitri, I will mount this lord of realm of birds onto the pyre and cremate him who is killed 
by a feral demon..." Thus saying to Lakshmana, Rama said this to dead eagle Jataayu. [3-68-28]

Shlok 29- 30: "Oh, greatly mighty king of eagles, by me cremated ritually and by me aptly consented to, you depart 
to the unexcelled heavenly worlds... you depart to those worlds that are destined for the virtuosos 
of Vedic-rituals, and to those worlds that are destined for the practisers of ascesis amid Five-Ritual-fires, 
and to those that are destined for un-retreating combatants, and to those worlds that destined for the 
donors of lands..." So said Rama to the departed Jataayu. [3-68-29, 30]

[Commentary] 'When a Vedic-ritual is performed the resultant factor is undoubtedly puNya 'merit' for those,
yaj~naaH shiilam sadvR^ittam yeSaam te and the worlds yaa gatiH gamyata iti gatiH - lokaH. 
And this is different to that of practising ascesis amid Five-Fires. ahita agne, ahitaaH paristhaapitaaH 
agnayaH yaH pancaagnayoH yasya saH... 'But animals or birds have no faculty to perform those rituals 
and they have their own course of lifecycle after their demise. Then where is the question of a bird 
going to heaven, which heaven is scheduled to some specialists...' is the objection. But Jataayu acquired 
all those 'merits' when he combated without any retreat a paraa vartinaam and he is getting 
a short cut without undergoing too many other kinds of births, and he is given mukti 'emancipation' 
from lifecycles, for his action on behalf of a godlike Rama is justifiable and befitting to get a final 
release, by word of Rama by me cremated ritually and by me aptly consented to... where He alone 
can transcend the manmade rules.

[Commentary] 'Then the cremation, that too ritualistic one, is unavailable for birds and animals, how then can Rama 
perform funerals for birds, or get them performed for monkeys, as in the case of Vali...' For this it 
is said, 'that's why Rama had to cremate Jataayu and further said by me cremated ritually and by 
me aptly consented to... as sort of special sanction of mukti, because the animality has 
no authority in scriptures or its rites. Taking some action, endeavouring to protect dharma, 
or obstructing a dharma, itself is superior to mere reverencing a god, or performing a daily 
rot of yaj~na, yaaga-s,, etc., which in itself is a subjective performance. Here Jataayu did 
not attack Ravana keeping Rama or Seetha in view, but attacked Ravana only to play his part in stalling
a dharma, which is not that easy, like purchasing some temple tickets to perform some ritual, 
for and on behalf of ticket holders and their families.

[Commentary] For this it is said in nR^simha puraaNa 
says that mat kR^ite 
nidhan yasmaat tvayaa praaptaa tam dvijottama | tasmaat mama prasaadena viShNu lokam avaapyasi || 
'because of me you attained your demise, thereby you get the realms of Vishnu...' where 'because of 
me' is to be taken not as an individual godhood, but as dharma, 'because of dharma...' itself. 
Hence the special sanctions to Jataayu, where such sanctions are absent in the case of Vali, as he followed 
the course of a dharma and there are many scripts that say Rama gave this emancipation to Jataayu, 
in chorus uvaaca 
gaccha bhadram te mama viShNo paramam padam - aadhyaatma raamaayana - raaghavasya prasaadena sa gR^idhraH 
paramam padam - padma puraaNa - sugrivo hanumaan R^ikSho gajo grdhrio vaNik patha - tilaka -teShu bhagavad 
a~NsheShu anuraagiNaH kosala nagara janapadaaH te api tan manasaaH satsaalokyataam aapuH || viShnu puraaNa

[Commentary] 'Has this Rama got no other work than weeping for his beloved ones and patiently performing obsequies 
to all lowborn, lowly subjects like dead monkey, birds, or even each individual demonic soldiers... 
they are all shuudra-s' is haunted feeling to some. For this it is said
na shuudraa 
bhagavat bhaktaa vipraa bhaagavataa smR^itaa | te shuudraa ye hi a bhaktaa janaardane || 'one who 
is devotee of Vishnu cannot be called a shuudra... he is to be called vipra, Bhaagavata... 
but a non-devotee, may he be in any caste, he is a shuudra...' And shuudra is upa lakshaNa 
to birds or animals, thereby even animals and birds are on an even footing, if it comes to paying deference 
to god, and god alone is capable to decree emancipation to every or any being. 'Again it is said that 
Rama is god, but yet he weeps... is it not self-contradictory...' Not so, when a neighbour weeps for 
the hardships of his neighbour, won't the neighbourly god weep...' that too on incarnating as a human...
vyasaneShu 
manuShyaaNaam bhR^isham bhavati duHkhitaH 'when humans are in difficulties, He wails much...' 
but waits much also, till those humans can correct or come over their problems on their own, keeping 
a little faith on Him...' Here also, the sobbing of Rama is comparatively nothing when compared to the 
sobbing for Seetha, because the action of Jataayu is not that sob-ful, in encountering a dharma... 
thus Valmiki is aware of 'good' sobbing and 'bad' sobbing in this sob-stuff, called Ramayana.

[Commentary] And for 
this Dharmaakuutam says: anena 
mahad anuj~nayaa uttamaa gatiH bhavati it suucitam | tathaa ca adharvaNii shrutiH - yam yam lokam manasaa 
sa~Nvibhaati vishuddha sattvaH kaamayate yaashca kaamaan | tam tam lokam jayate taam ca kaamaaan tasmaat 
aatmaj~nam hi arcayet bhuuti kaamaH - bhaaShyam - ukta lakShaNam sarvaatmanam aatmatvena pratipannaH 
| tasya sarva aatmatvaat eva sarvaa avaapti lakShaNam phalam aaha - - - aatmaj~nam aatmaj~natena vishuddha 
antaHkaraNam hi arcet puujayet - ataH puujaarha eva asau |

Shlok 31: On saying that way, that ethical-souled Rama mounted that lord of birds onto the pyre and he sorrowfully 
incinerated that eagle in a flaring fire of pyre, as he would do in respect of his own deceased relative. 
[3-68-31]

Shlok 32: Then that resolute Rama on going into forest along with Soumitri hunted a robust-bodied, big Rohi animal, 
or, Kesari animal, and then he spread sacred grass on ground to place that offering to the deceased 
soul of that bird. [3-68-32]

Shlok 33: On drawing up the flesh of that Rohi animal and lumping it to gobbets, that highly observant Rama placed 
those gobbets on pleasant greenish pasturelands as obsequial offerings in respect of that bird Jataayu. 
[3-68-33]

Shlok 34: Rama immediately chanted Vedic hymns that are employed in such funerals of one's own paternal people, 
as Brahmans say that those hymns are employable in such rites as they lead the soul of the departed 
to heaven. [3-68-34]

[Commentary] Rama chants two Vedic passages yaamya suukta, naaraayaNa suukta - aapastamba sutra-s  as they are usually 
recited by Brahmans in such funeral rites. Here it is 'so imperfectly conducted, because it is for an 
ineligible bird, that too by an unrelated highborn Kshatriya Rama, reciting unconcerned Vedic hymns...' 
is the objection. Jataayu is beyond any caste or creed by way his devotion to duty and by his self-sacrifice 
while on duty. Hence, he is beyond eligibility or opposite of it. Funerals are to be conducted by one's 
own sons or nearest relatives. If none of the relatives of the dead is present to cremate, they are 
to be undertaken by the king of that kingdom. When Rama blessed the soul of Jataayu to go to highest 
realms, which are far beyond the Veda-s of mortals, it is a sacrosanct act to chant those hymns... on 
human level; hence, Rama's action is clearly pro-Vedic. And in Vaishnavaite tenets everything culminates 
into one - Vishnu. 'the adherents of Vishnu, may it be an animal, like Gajendra, the elephant, or humans, 
like Shabari et al., or a bird, like Jataayu, by Him, by Vishnu alone, they are led to the Ultimate 
course of the realm of Vishnu...'

Shlok 35: Then both the sons of that notable man, namely Dasharatha, on going to River Godavari they have oblated 
waters for that king of eagles, Jataayu. [3-68-35]

Shlok 36: Both of the Raghava-s took funeral baths in the waters of River Godavari and then made water oblations 
to the king of eagles. [3-68-36]

Shlok 37: That king of eagle Jataayu, who has performed a creditworthy deed of stalling and combating Ravana, 
but who is felled by that Ravana, went away to the merited and auspicious heavenly realms of his own, 
as and when consecrated by sublime sage like Rama. [3-68-37]

Shlok 38: Even those two, Rama and Lakshmana, on performing water oblations in respect of that best bird Jataayu, 
and on assertively giving thought to the information given by Jataayu, they like the chiefs of gods, 
namely Vishnu and Indra, went to southerly woods when their mind is set to search for Seetha. [3-68-38]



SARGA 69
------------------------------

[Text] Kabandha captures Rama and Lakshmana while they are searching forests for Seetha. In the meantime, a 
demoness named Ayomukhi wanted to romance with Lakshmana, but Lakshmana cuts her ear and nose and chases 
away. The episode of Kabandha has a turning point in the epic.

Shlok 1: In this way, Raghava-s on offering water oblations to Jataayu went southwestward in the forest and proceeded 
looking around for Seetha. [3-69-1]

[Commentary] They firstly have to go westward in order to go south as said by Jataayu, and as continued in next verse 
onwards.

Shlok 2: On going in southwest direction, both the Ikshvaku-s wielding bows, arrows, and swords, have come about 
a pathway which is an off the beaten track. [3-69-2]

Shlok 3: That pathway is thickly wrapped in and penned up with numerous trees, climber plants, and hedgerows 
from all over, thus that is jammed, blocked and horrid in its appearance. [3-69-3]

Shlok 4: On taking up the southern direction, and on crossing over that highly horrendous and thick of the forest, 
both those spryly energetic brothers moved ahead, speedily. [3-69-4]

Shlok 5: Thereafter, both the highly vigorous Raghava-s have entered the impassable Kraunca forest, on going 
three krosa-s from Janasthaana. [3-69-5]

[Commentary] The Ancient Indian measures for distance, as per Kautilya's Artha Shaastra, a
republication of Penguin are: 1 angula = 3/4 of present day inch; 4 angula-s =
dharnugraha [bow grip]= 3 in; 8 angula-s = 1 dhanurmuSTi [fist with
thumb raised]= 6 in; 12 angula-s = 1 vitasta [span-distance of stretched out palm
between the tips of a person's thumb and little finger]= 9 in; 4 vitasta-s = 1 aratni
/ hasta [cubit]= 18 in; 4 aratni-s = 1 danDa / dhanus [bow]= 6 ft; 10
danDa-s = 1 rajju = 60 ft; 2 rajju-s = 1 paridesha = 120 ft;
2000 dhanus-s = 1 krosa / goruTa = 4000 yards or 2 1/4 miles, nearly 3.66 km; 4
krosa-s = 1 yojana = 9 miles, nearly 15 km; and this being so, the British
revenue measured a yojana as a 5 mile distance and Chambers and Oxfords has this 5 mile
figure in their dictionaries, while traditionally a yojana is said as a distance of 10 miles.

Shlok 6-7: Those two brothers who are disquieted by the abduction of Seetha are now agog to find her, and they 
intently explored that forest temporising there and there. That forest is evocative of a congeries of 
many a black-cloud, and it embodies numerous flowers on many a flowered tree, numerous flights of birds 
flitting over them, and numerous animals sprawling under them, and with them that forest is as though 
highly rejoiced everywhere. [3-69-6, 7]

Shlok 8- 9- 10: Then, both the brothers on passing over that Kraunca forest and on going from there eastwardly on a 
three-krosha route, those sons of Dasharatha have seen a horrendous forest in between Kraunca forest 
and Matanga hermitage, which is overspread with various thicketed and impassable trees, and over-sprawled 
by numerous gigantic predators and vulturine birds, and on scrutinising such a forest everywhere, there 
they saw a cave in a mountain, which is abyssal, equal to infernal region, and ever enshrouded by gloom. 
[3-69-8. 9, 10]

Shlok 11: On getting at that cave those manly-tigers have seen a demoness nearby that cave, who is massive in 
shape and misshapen in her face. [3-69-11]

Shlok 12-13: Both the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, have seen a demoness there, who is an inducer of horror to the 
dunderheaded dullards, traumatic in her acts and truculent in her appearance, pot-bellied, pierce-fanged, 
overblown, pachydermatous, head hair shaggy, body shape lumpy-bumpy, and she is going on eating massive 
beasts. [3-69-12, 13]

Shlok 14: Drawing nigh of those valorous brothers who are journeying on their way, that demoness actually clung 
onto Lakshmana who is going ahead of his elder brother, saying, "come... let's romance..." [3-69-14]

Shlok 15-16: Closeting Soumitri in her embrace she told him this sentence, "I am Ayomukhi, by my name... you won 
me by your heroic personality, by that way, none can win me over... thus, you alone are my lover... 
oh, hero, oh, my husband... you will romance with me on mountaintops, in rivers, and on sandy isles, 
till the end of this life..." So is the love prattle of that demoness Ayomukhi. [3-69-15, 16]

Shlok 17: When said that way that enemy-suppressor Lakshmana became furious, and upraising his sword he sheared 
off her nose, one ear, and one of her breasts. [3-69-17]

Shlok 18: When her nose and ear are cut off that demoness of hideous mien yelled highly in a high voice, and she 
rushed off as she had rushed in at Lakshmana. [3-69-18]

Shlok 19: When she fled those two brothers who are the eliminators of the friends of their enemies, have travelled 
further into the forest and entered a dense area of that forest, with their spiritedness as their guiding 
force. [3-69-19]

Shlok 20: Though Lakshmana is the one with preparedness, properness, and pureness and thus a highly fulgent one 
by his persona, he prayfully said this sentence to his brother Rama whose anima is radiantly fulgorous. 
[3-69-20]

Shlok 21: "My left arm is strongly shuddering and my heart is as though distraught... and even undesirable forebodings 
are also bidding fair... [3-69-21]

Shlok 22: "Oh, exalted brother, thereby you be at the ready by paying attention to my expedient words... these 
forebodings are indeed portending to me as if some hazard is immediately ensuing... [3-69-22]

Shlok 23: "This eerily dreadful bird known to be Vanjulaka is loudly ululating as though presaging our triumph 
in any given conflict that may ensue..." So said Lakshmana to Rama. [3-69-23]

Shlok 24: When those two brothers are searching entire forest for Seetha in that way, they heard a boisterous 
brouhaha emanated as though to completely shatter down that forest. [3-69-24]

Shlok 25: As though an unbearable windstorm muffles up the forest, that forest's cacophony appeared to be unbearably 
filling up that forest.



As though an unbearable windstorm muffles up the sky, that forest's cacophony appeared to be unbearably 
filling up that forest. [3-69-25]

Shlok 26: But desiring to know the source of that noise that sword-wielder Rama has seen a gigantically giant-bodied 
and gigantesque-chested demon in a section of brushwood along with his younger brother Lakshmana. [3-69-26]

Shlok 27: Then they both had to drew nigh of a waylaying demon Kabandha, who is situated frontally with an overgrown 
body, which is neckless, ergo headless, ergo mouth in paunch. [3-69-27]

Shlok 28: That diabolical demon is peaking like a huge mountain, his hair is horripilate and thickset, and his 
gleam is like a dark cloud, and his sounding is like a thunder. [3-69-28]

Shlok 29: Only one ochry eye blazing like the tongue of an inferno is there on his forehead, which forehead situated 
on his chest. That single eye with incisive and sharp-sight is broad beaming and wide angling, on which 
there are winglike eyelids. That monster is now licking his giant mouth that is stuffed with spearhead 
like fangs, as he has just finished a gobble, and the brothers had to drew nigh of such a demon. [3-69-29, 
30]

Shlok 31: He is eating the highly brutal bears, lions, predators, and elephants, and he is outstretching both 
of his deadly arms, each of which is stretchable to a yojana distance, and the bothers neared such a 
demon. [3-69-31]

Shlok 33- 34a: That demon stayed waylaying the pathway of both the brothers who chanced there, while he is catching 
bears, divers flights of birds, and numerous choicest animals of those and those herds, gripping them 
with both of his long-reaching hands and hauling towards his mouth at his paunch, or dropping them off 
if they are unpalatable, and the brothers reached nearby of such a demon. [3-69-32, 33a]

Shlok 33b- 34: On travelling just a krosha distance, then they have seen Kabandha, whose body is colossal, and who 
is heinous and hideous, and who is like living trunk fenced by its shoulders and arms, and who by his 
physique is very deadly in appearance. [3-69-33b, 34]

[Commentary] Earlier it is said that they saw Kabandha in brushwood and now they are seeing him alone at a distance 
of 2 1/4 miles away from them. Their seeing him is continuous and thereby the height of Kabandha is 
established and he can be seen from a distance, as with a hillock. Their pathway is this only and it 
is waylaid by this demon.

Shlok 35: He that overlong-armed Kabandha outstretching his overlong arms snatched both of the Raghava-s, keeping 
them side-by-side in his fists, and wringing them with his might. [3-69-35]

[Commentary] Though both the arms of the demon came to these brothers apart and aside, he snatched them and kept 
his closed fists together, in which they are wrung, so that he can examine them clearly with his single 
eye. This also gave a chance for the conversation between the brothers. Otherwise, if one arm goes one 
way and the other in another way, there will be a gap of 2 yojana-s, as each arm can stretch to a yojana 
distance.

Shlok 36: Though they are the grapplers with swords and brandishers of unerring bows, and though outblazing is 
their pneuma and outstanding is their dexterity, both of those great mighty brothers lost control and 
had to yield themselves to that demon when he captured and dragged them. [3-69-36]

Shlok 37- 38a: In that situation, that valiant Rama, the legatee of Raghava-s, is not verily anguished owing to his 
courage, but Lakshmana is very much anguished, as if he is callow and in an unsheltered state, and he 
that younger brother of Raghava, namely Lakshmana, also dejectedly said this to Rama, the legatee of 
Raghava-s. [3-69-37, 38a]

[Commentary] The expression of 'unsheltered one' of Lakshmana is found as a self-sympathetic and unbefitting to him 
in a crisis. But, when read with the following dialogue of Lakshmana it is correct. He wanted to edge 
over Jataayu in self-sacrifice for the sake of brotherhood. And the boyish callowness is to tell that 
Lakshmana has not recollected for a while, as to how they have handled Viradha, in the opening chapters 
of this canto. His overalled thinking is that his brother should be safe, at the cost of his own self, 
if that comes to that.

Shlok 38b-39a: "Oh, valiant brother, see me, who am out of control on my inner-self, and gone into the control of the 
demon... oh, Raghava, you leave me and get yourself released from the grip of the demon... [3-69-38b, 
39a]

Shlok 39b- 40a: "Indeed offer me as an offering to this quiddity, and you seek safety at your pleasure... and you will 
reach Vaidehi shortly... this is my belief... [3-69-39b, 40a]

Shlok 40b- 41: "Oh, Kakutstha, on regaining the kingdom of our father and forefathers, and when enthroned, oh, Rama, 
it will be apt of you to reminisce me always..." So said Lakshmana to Rama. [3-69-40b, 41a]

Shlok 41b- 42a: But when Lakshmana said that way, Rama said to Soumitri, "Fret not thyself, futilely... oh, brave one, 
your king of persons will not get dismayed, futilely... [3-69-41b, 42a]

Shlok 42a- 43b: In the meantime, that ruthless, log-armed, fiercest demon Kabandha thunderously asked those brothers, 
Rama and Lakshmana. [3-69-42b, 43a]

Shlok 43b- 44a: "Who are you two? Your shoulders are akin to the bull-humps, and you are shouldering longbows and brandishing 
broad swords, how have you come about this province? For god's sake, I come across my most dainty morsel... 
[3-69-43b, 44a]

[Commentary] The last compound has different compositions in different mms. It is taken here, as 'dainty morsel' 
as the 'eyes' is ill fitting in the compound, as this demon has only one eye.

Shlok 44b- 45a: "What business you have here, and for which reason you have come here... you chanced for me who am sitting 
here and painfully ravenous... [3-69-44b, 45a]

Shlok 45b- 46a: "Though you are with arrows, bows and swords, and though you are like bulls with sharp horns ready to 
gore... but they are all a waste, as your life has readily become ungainful on reaching nigh of my sight 
and arms..." So said Kabandha, in his arrogant tone. [3-69-45b, 46a]

Shlok 46b- 47a: On hearing that sentence of that vile-souled Kabandha, Rama said this to Lakshmana with a wilted face. 
[3-69-46b, 47a]

Shlok 47b- 48a: "Oh, truth-valiant Lakshmana, now coming to pass is a worst catastrophe, after a worse catastrophe, 
after a catastrophe...namely, the expiration at the hands of this demon presently, and the expropriation 
of Seetha previously, and the expulsion from kingship, still previously... nonetheless, without coming 
across that ladylove, this disastrous despair of ending our lives is coming about... [3-69-47b, 48a]

Shlok 48b- 49a: "Oh, Lakshmana, the efficacy of Time is preponderant and proportional among all beings... oh, manly-tiger, 
why generalisation... see, as to how yourself and even myself are entangled in the tangles of life, 
even though we assert ourselves to be brave and best... [3-69-48b, 49a]

Shlok 49b- 50: Oh, Lakshmana, to show its impact on each and every being Time, or God is unencumbered and unremitting... 
may he be a brave one or a brawny one... or, may they be those that have perfected their missilery... 
when Time chances their nigh, they have to founder... as with a sandy levee... [3-69-49b, 50]

[Commentary] The use of word God for Time is to say that time is a created phenomenon, and to say Absolute is beyond 
time and nature as said na vR^iksha kaalaa prakR^itbhiH yasmaat
prapancam parivartae ayam...shvetaashvatara 
upanishat 6-6.

Shlok 51: Rama being the son of Dasharatha is an indomitable one, besides, a firmly and factually valorous one, 
by which he earned a great renown, and he on telling thus, and on looking over that recalcitrantly vengeful 
Soumitri, then Rama readied himself by his own steadied thinking. [3-69-51]



SARGA 70
------------------------------

[Text] Kabandha's overlong arms are cut off when he wanted to devour Rama and Lakshmana as godsend dainty morsels. 
Then Kabandha wishes to know who these two are and when Lakshmana informs him of Rama, that demon feels 
elated for his accursed state is over at the hands of Rama.

Shlok 1: On prying at those two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, who are completely stowed in the hangman's halter-like 
arms of the demon, and who are enduring within it, Kabandha said this sentence to them. [3-70-1]

Shlok 2: "Oh, excellent Kshatriya-s, on seeing me who am miserably famished, really what for you stay cool? You 
are the godsend gobs of mine, and hence now you are almost dead..." So said Kabandha to brothers. [3-70-2]

Shlok 3: Lakshmana who is possessed by anguish, and who is determined to wreck revenge on that demon, said these 
expedient and advisable words to Rama on hearing that demon's word. [3-70-3]

Shlok 4: "This scurrilous demon quickly hauled in you and me to his face level, and he will quickly take us in, 
therefore, we will have to swiftly hack off his lengthy arms at his shoulder level... [3-70-4]

Shlok 5: "Gruesome is this gargantuan bodied demon, and triumphing over just with his arms he has utterly devastated 
this province, and he now wishes to end us... [3-70-5]

Shlok 6: "Oh, king Raghava, killing the non-aggressive is tantamount to the killing of animals that are led into 
Vedic-ritual in its midst is despicable to the kings... [3-70-6]

[Commentary] The text varies with other mms. kratu madhye upa niitaam will change to
kratu madhye apa niitaam in Maheshvara Tiirtha's version, then it translates as 'an animal
led out of the ritual half way through the ritual...' meaning that 'the animal unbefitting for
sacrifice...' And that is to say 1] an animal not prearranged and sanctified right from the
beginning, but brought in the middle of ritual; 2] or, one that is brought for ritual which has to
yield without being aggressive pratikaara hiina shakti; 3] or, paryagni kR^itaa na
araNyaam utsR^ijyam a himsaayaa 'unsanctified or wild animals brought from wilds are to be let
off, unhurt...' 4] or, one that which is not at the sacrificial post - it is not to be
sacrificed...' and Lakshmana says addressing Rama as 'oh, king, you have to let off those beasts,
but not this beastly demon who is aggressive and contemplating a regicide...'

Shlok 7: On hearing all of their conversation that demon is infuriated, and then widely opening his ferocious 
mouth he started to wolf down both of them. [3-70-7]

Shlok 8: Then both the Raghava-s are very highly gladdened as the demon is hauling them towards his eye at shoulder 
level, and as they are the brothers with circumspection, they instantly mutilated his arms right at 
their shoulder joints only with two swords. [3-70-8]

[Commentary] This compound su sam hR^iSTau is as per the text of Govindaraja and
Maheshvara Tiirtha states this as su sam vignau meaning 'very highly agitated...' agitated
at the short time available to cut off his hands, before falling into his well-head like mouth. And
this expression 'very highly gladdened' is for the righteous advice given by Lakshmana,
circumspectly.

Shlok 9: Then that dextrous Rama with an unrestrained speed hacked off the right arm, and valiant Lakshmana on 
his part hewed down the left arm that speedily. [3-70-9]

Shlok 10: He that overlong-armed Kabandha fell down with mangled arms, reverberated the sky, earth, and all of 
the ten points of horizon with a cacophonous voice, like a black-thunderous-cloud. [3-70-10]

Shlok 11: That demon on seeing at his dissevered shoulders on which the gushes of blood are overflowing, he self-piteously 
asked those two bold ones thus as, "who are you..." [3-70-11]

Shlok 12: When that great mighty Kabandha is asking thus, Lakshmana who has prosperous characteristics has informed 
him about Rama of Kakutstha, an unremitting dynasty. [3-70-12]

Shlok 13: "He is known to people by the name of Rama, the legatee of Ikshvaku dynasty, and you know me as his 
younger brother, Lakshmana, by my name... [3-70-13]

Shlok 14: "Countervailed from kingdom by mother this Rama is bluntly sent to forests, and he is on the rove in 
great forests along with me ad his wife... [3-70-14]

Shlok 15: "A demon stole his wife while he whose leverage is like that of god is living in the unpopulated forest... 
and wishing to retrieve her we came here... [3-70-15]

Shlok 16: "But who are you? Your legs are broken, and your mouth is infernal, yet it is on your chest, and alike 
a topless, rootless tree trunk you are sprawling in the forest, how so, or, for what reason?" Lakshmana 
asked the demon thus. [3-70-16]

Shlok 17: But Kabandha is highly delighted when Lakshmana spoke that way, as the words of Indra came to his memory, 
and he said these words in reply. [3-70-17]

Shlok 18: "Oh, manly tigers, by my providence you are revealed to me... welcome to you... and providentially sheared 
are these shackles, called my two arms, by you... [3-70-18]

[Commentary] The arms, mouth-to-stomach, and another organ are the epitomes of mortals. A
mortal does everything with arms and devours anything with mouth. martyaa kartaa bhoktaa
ca Now those shackles of mortality are severed and he is ready for immortality.

Shlok 19: "Oh, manly tiger, actually how this form of mine is disfigured, of course owing to my distrustful behaviour, 
that you may listen while I narrate it to you. [3-70-19]



SARGA 71
------------------------------

[Text] Kabandha requests Rama to incinerate him, so that he would get his divine form and then would be able 
to give some clues in regaining Seetha. He admits that the present hideous state has chanced only because 
of his arrogant behaviour, thereby a sort of repentance has occurred in him. A course of conversations 
occurs among these two, as each is distrustful of the other.

Shlok 1- 2a: "Oh, great dextrous Rama with great daring and dashing, as to how the physique of sun, moon, and even 
that of Indra is there now, my physique was also like that earlier, an unbelievable mien and renowned 
in all the three worlds... [3-71-1, 2a]

Shlok 2b- 3a: "Such as I was with an admirable body, disguising myself in this kind of horrendous form which is utterly 
dreadful to the world, I was scaring the forest living sages, there and there... [3-71-2]

Shlok 3b- 4a: "On one day, when a great sage named Sthuulashira was collecting divers forest produce for his Vedic-ritual, 
I scared him with this ugly form and I even exasperated him... [3-71-3b, 4a]

Shlok 4b- 5a: "On seeing me that sage who is an enforcer of deadly curse cursed me in this way, 'that which is presently 
diabolic and despicable form of yours, hereinafter you will abide in this form alone...' [3-71-4b, 5a]

Shlok 5b-6a: "When I begged that enraged sage as, 'even if I have committed this blasphemy owing to my blasphemous 
fate, will there be an end to this blasphemed form of mine, or not...' and then he spoke this word to 
me... [3-71-5b, 6a]

Shlok 6b-7a: " 'When Rama incinerates you in an uninhibited forest on chopping off your shoulders, then you will 
regain your own grand and auspicious form...' So said the sage to me... [3-71-6b, 7a]

Shlok 7b- 8a: "Oh, Lakshmana, you may know as the most handsome son of Danu, and this misshapen form has chanced on 
me owing the ire of Indra in battlefield... [3-71-7b, 8a]

[Commentary] The cause of curse is said so far and now the effect is narrated, and
tiivrataratapaHpratyaahitapitaamahavaralabhaashastravadhyabhaavadarpitena 
mayaa raNe vikramya pradharShita shakraH - so says dk about it.

Shlok 8b- 9a: "I have gladdened Grandparent Braham with severe ascesis and He granted longevity to me, and then a 
kind of recalcitrance touched off in my mind... [3-71-8b, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: " 'When longevity is acquired by me what Indra can do to me...' thus relying upon that kind of certitude, 
I jousted with Indra in a bout... [3-71-9b, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: "But the Thunderbolt that has a hundred cutting edges and that which is launched from Indra's hand has 
rammed by head and thighs into my body... [3-71-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 12a: "When I begged of him saying, 'lead me to the hell of Yama, rather than making me to live this hell 
of a body...' Then Indra said this to me, 'Let the Grandparent Brahma's word about your longevity come 
true...' Thus Indra spared me to me... [3-71-11b, 12a]

Shlok 12b- 13a: " 'By the impaction of Thunderbolt disarranged are my thighs and head, thereby my mouth went into my 
stomach... and without thighs how can I prowl, without arms how can I scrabble, and without a mouth 
how can I guzzle... and how am I capable to live on, and even that living too, is destined for too long 
a time...' [3-71-12b, 13a]

Shlok 13b- 14a: "When I said to Indra this way, Indra devised for me yojana long arms, also that way a rapier-fanged 
mouth in my paunch... [3-71-13b, 14a]

Shlok 14b- 15a: "Such as I am, I have been eating the lions, elephants, animals, and tigers that are on the move in 
this forest, hauling them in with both of my overlong arms... [3-71-14b, 15a]

Shlok 15b- 16a: "Indra has also said to me, 'as and when Rama hacks off your arms along with Lakshmana in a conflict, 
then you can go to heaven...' Thus Indra said to me and vanished. [3-71-15b, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 17a: "Oh, sire, I am grabbing whatever I see in this forest while living with this body... oh, powerful king, 
as I feel it meetly and a must for me... [3-71-16b, 17a]

Shlok 17b- 18a: "I believed that Rama will certainly come nigh of my captivity, and confiding myself in this kind of 
determination, presaged by sage Sthuulashira, as well... I have been toiling to dislodge this body... 
[3-71-17b, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: "Oh, Raghava, as to how this has happened in this way according to the sum and substance told by the 
sage Sthulashira, you alone are that Rama, let safe betide you, and none other than you is capable to 
mangle me... [3-71-18b, 19a]

Shlok 19b- 20a: "Oh, impetuous man Rama, if I were to be beatified by you two by incinerating me in Fire, I will advice 
you about the next course of your action... I will further advise you about your prospective friend..." 
So said Kabandha to Rama. [3-71-19b, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: When Raghava is said thus by that Kabandha, the heir of Danu, that duty-minded Rama said this word to 
Kabandha while Lakshmana is hearing. [3-71-20b, 21a]

[Commentary] This Kabandha and his lineage is an enigma and variously said at various places, just by deflection 
of one or two words. This being the riddle of grammarians, we are supposed to know that he is a demon 
blessed for gandharva-hood, and then accursed to demon-hood, and then becomes a gandharva again and 
goes to heaven, at the blessing of Rama. The last compound in second stanza differs with that of other 
mms, in wording, but not in its meaning.

Shlok 21b- 22a: "Ravana conveniently stole my illustrious wife when myself and my brother exited from Janasthaana... 
[3-71-21b, 22a]

Shlok 22b- 23a: "I only know his name but not the form of that demon... and we are unaware either of his stronghold 
or of his staying power... [3-71-22b, 23a]

[Commentary] It appears that Rama is dealing with this Kabandha with a half-belief, because he is rehashing the same 
good old parroting. Here there is a mutual distrust. 'What if this demon when reduced to ashes cannot 
say anything... like Viraadha...' is the distrust in Rama, and 'what if I am going to say the name of 
Sugreeva now itself, before they incinerate me, and on knowing the name of Sugreeva, what if this Rama 
departs quickly to Sugreeva, without burning me...' is the mistrust of Kabandha. The averral of Rama 
to Kabandha is unclear so far, and in order to put his case straight Rama has to rehash, so he is going 
over again. The same is the case with Sugreeva. He blatantly lies to Rama that he does not know Ravana, 
in Kishkindha Kanda. And if insisted Sugreeva, or to that matter of fact Seetha, both are ready with 
their self-assertive dialogue:   kaH na aparaadhyati  'who errs not...'

Shlok 23b- 24a: "It will be apt of you to show befitting mercy on us who are anguished by agony, running all over helter-skelter 
like unsheltered ones, and we who will be compliant for your restitution... [3-71-23b, 24a]

Shlok 24b- 25a: "Oh, brave Kabandha, on bringing dried up firewood that was rent at times by elephants, and on digging 
a large trench, we will incinerate you in it... [3-71-24b, 25a]

Shlok 25b- 26a: "Such as you are, if you actually know who stole Seetha, or whereto she is stolen, either... you clearly 
inform of her when incinerated, thus you will be rendering a most gracious deed to me, and to all concerned..." 
Thus Rama made clear of his case. [3-71-25b, 26a]

Shlok 26b-27a: When he is said thus that expert articulator Kabandha replied Rama, who is also an expert enunciator, 
with expedient words. [3-71-26b, 27a]

Shlok 27b- 28a: "There is no divine knowledge to me as of now... nor I can identify Maithili... but when I am burnt 
I assume my own original divine form, and then I will be able tell about him, who will find her out... 
[3-71-27b, 28a]

Shlok 28b- 29: "With this unburnt body, oh, Rama, I indeed have no ability to discern anything, hence oh, lord, I will 
be able to speak about him who can familiarise you with that great mighty demon, by whom your Seetha 
is stolen, only after that incineration... [3-71-28b, 29]

Shlok 30: "Oh, Raghava, utterly distorted is my acumen, indeed, by the blemish of curse... and this form which 
is despicable to world has bechanced only because of my own antics... [3-71-30]

Shlok 31: "Oh, Rama, soon you have to toss me into trench to burn me customarily, sooner than the Sun's going 
to Mt. Dusk when his horses are fatigued... [3-71-31]

[Commentary] Now Rama started to believe Kabandha because the simile used by him refers to the dusking Sun with fatigued 
horses. Though Kabandha is always telling that 'I have no knowledge... I lost my discernment...' etc., 
half told is the fact that there is someone out there to help Rama. Hence, the believability is bechanced. 
Sun's horses will never be fatigued, but fatigued is this Kabandha in this grotesque physique, as a 
vehicle predestined to communicate some information to Rama. And when a dusking Sun is indicated, another 
dawning Sun is also indicated, in his freshness. So also, Kabandha is about to resurrect after this 
incineration, as a vehicular messenger for Rama.

Shlok 32: "Oh, Rama, the legatee of Raghu, when I am scripturally burnt by you in a trench, oh, great valiant 
Rama, for sure, I will tell of him, who can quiet fathom that demon... [3-71-32]

Shlok 33: "Oh, Raghava, you have to befriend him with an amicable comportment... and that valiantly alacritous 
one will be gladdened by the sequel of your friendship, and he will evolve a succour to you... [3-71-33]

Shlok 34: "Oh, Raghava, nothing is there in all the three worlds that is unfamiliar to him, for he circumnavigated 
all worlds once, in a different context... [3-71-34]

[Commentary] Even now Kabandha is not naming Sugreeva, only for fear of loosing Rama, without burning the half dead 
Kabandha. Kabandha knows that humans do not burn or bury the undead, and Rama may now leave this dying 
Kabandha to his natural death, and go away. But Rama is already acquainted with the dying ceremonies 
of demons, where they die only after a physically dead, perforce, by consigning them to fire or burying 
them alive, as in the case of Viraadha. Hence this stingy maiming and baiting of Kabandha is continued, 
to burn him down, perforce.



SARGA 72
------------------------------

[Text] When Rama incinerates Kabandha he resurrects as a celestial being and detailing about Sugreeva he urges 
Rama to befriend him. He informs Rama that Sugreeva is also in a similar condition and he needs some 
one to rely upon, in order to overcome his problems, and thus Kabandha asks Rama to help Sugreeva, and 
get help as requital from Sugreeva.

Shlok 1: When Kabandha said that way, both those brave men and lords of people, on throwing the body of Kabandha 
into a mountain cleft and then embedded it with firewood. [3-72-1]

Shlok 2: On his part Lakshmana started to torch that pyre with highly sparkling torches from all over, and even 
that pyre too suddenly blazed with blazes from all over. [3-72-2]

Shlok 3: That massy body of Kabandha is full with fat and while it is being cooked, it is in simile with a massy 
gob of ghee. But the Fire had to stew that body tardily, though that stewed meat is Fire's favourite 
dish, because of that body's massiveness. [3-72-3]

Shlok 4: In a trice that highly dynamic Kabandha zoomed up shoving off that pyre, and he is now attired in lily-white 
vestments and angelic garlands, and appeared like a fumeless fire. [3-72-4]

Shlok 5: Then highly gladdened Kabandha jumped up onto sky from the pyre, and there he is irradiant with unsullied 
clothing, and fineries decorated on every limb. [3-72-5]

Shlok 6- 7a: On going to firmament Kabandha is now seated in a dazzling celestial aircraft yoked with swans, which 
endows renown because it takes the occupants to the realms of Brahma, and sitting in that celestial 
aircraft he said this sentence to Rama, while his own great glimmer and glitter beamed forth in all 
ten quarters. [3-72-6, 7]

Shlok 7b- 8: "Oh, Raghava, how you will regain Seetha, that you listen from me in its essence... oh, Rama, by which 
and which analyses everything will be analysed, six of such ideations are available in this world... 
and when a person is touched down by a spell of nemeses, he shall adore one who is equally in such spell 
of nemesis... [3-72-7b, 8]

[Commentary] The six ideations employed by kings in kingship are 1] sandhi a covenant with adverse kings; 
2] vigraha continuing hostilities; 3] yaana waging war; 4] aasana sit out 
for proper time; 5] dvaidhii bhaava creating factions and vicissitudes in enemy groups; 6]
samaashraya taking shelter under a coequal.

Shlok 9: "Oh, Rama, you along with Lakshmana went into a spell of nemesis, and thus you have become an underprivileged 
one, and that spell alone has obtained you this dire straits, in the form of abducting your wife... 
[3-72-9]

Shlok 10: "Oh, best among kind-hearted ones, thereby you have to certainly befriend such a soul in similar dire 
straits... however deeply I may think, I am not able to perceive your accomplishment if you do not befriended 
with such a soul... [3-72-10]

Shlok 11: "Oh, Rama, listen what I tell... a vanara is there by name Sugreeva, who is vengefully reneged by his 
brother Vali, the son of Indra... [3-72-11]

Shlok 12: "That self-respectful valiant Sugreeva is living on the Mt. Rishyamuka, a best mountain available in 
the lambent fringes of Pampa Lake, along with four other vanara-s. [3-72-12]

Shlok 13: "He that Sugreeva is a masterful one among vanara-s, highly mettlesome, self-resplendent, and illimitable 
is his self-radiance... and he is also truth-bound and culture-bound... a mastermind, master-hand and 
a taskmaster... [3-72-13]

Shlok 14: "He is a capable adventurer, a courageous exploiter and incomparable one in intrepidity and a brave 
one in incursions, and his personality will be coruscating ever and anon, for he is the son of Sun-god... 
but he is banished by his self-conceited brother owing to the reasons of kingdom... [3-72-14]

Shlok 15: "Oh, Rama, he will be your associate and an aid in searching for Seetha, and he conducts himself in 
your wellbeing, hence let not your heart yield to agony... [3-72-15]

Shlok 16: "Oh, tigerly Ikshvaaku, further nothing can be countermanded in this world which is indeed ineluctable, 
and it is impossible to countervail against Time, isn't it... [3-72-16]

Shlok 17- 18a: "Oh, bold one, you go straight from here to that great mighty Sugreeva, and oh, Raghava, on going from 
here now and promptly you fraternise with Sugreeva... and to not to bode any ill of unfriendliness among 
you two, you make him a friend before blazing Fire, making that Fire as an Attestor of your friendship... 
[3-72-17, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19a: "You shall not look down on that lord of monkeys taking him as a lowly simian, why because that Sugreeva 
is a valiant one, a guise changing wizard and presently he is in the need of a bolsterer, and if you 
render help he will be obligated to you for ever... [3-72-18b, 19]

Shlok 19b- 20a: "Now you two are capable enough to effectuate the desired task of Sugreeva, isn't it... whether his 
own purpose is achieved through you or not, he will effectuate your task... [3-72-19b, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: "Sugreeva is the son of Riksharaja, and the direct son of the Sun, but Vali trespassed against him. 
Wary of Vali's onslaughts Sugreeva is wandering around Pampa... [3-72-20b, 21a]

Shlok 21b-22a: "Oh, Raghava, right away and candidly you make that monkey Sugreeva, a wanderer in the forest, sheltering 
himself on Mt. Rishyamuka, as a friend of yours taking an oath on your weapon besides the Fire-witness... 
[3-72-21b, 22a]

[Commentary] The compound aayudham sam ni dhaaya  can mean in the three possible ways as said above. 
Any one, or three meanings can be obtained, as intensifiers.

Shlok 22b- 23a: "With his expertise that straightforward monkey Sugreeva is indeed conversant with all of the strongholds 
of anthropophagite demons in the world in their entirety... [3-72-22b, 23a]

Shlok 23b- 24a: "Oh, enemy-subjugator Rama, as far as the thousand rayed sun manifestly irradiates the world, oh, Raghava, 
thus far, nothing in the least is unfamiliar to him, isn't it... [3-72-23b, 24a]

Shlok 24b- 25a: "He makes the monkeys to purposefully rake over the expansive rivers, extensive mountains and their 
impassable cliffs and caves in locating your wife... [3-72-24b, 25a]

Shlok 25b- 26: "Oh, Raghava, he expedites giant bodied monkeys in all directions to search for her, who is agonised 
by your parting, and he quests after the residence of Ravana for that comely lady Maithili... [3-72-25b, 
26]

Shlok 27: "Whether that unreprovable ladylove of yours, Seetha, is located on the tops of Mt. Meru's peaks, or 
abiding on the planes of nadir of the earth, he that defiant one among fly-jumpers, Sugreeva, on entering 
there and annihilating the demons, he again bestows Seetha to you..." So Kabandha continued his advise 
to Rama regarding Sugreeva. [3-72-27]

[Commentary] Kabandha's suggestion that 'a bewailer shall befriend another bewailer...' is apparently a meaningless 
suggestion, keeping mythical imports aside, for a while. Though Kabandha is unaware about Ravana and 
his activities, he is aware of Vali and Sugreeva, according to his present narration. He should have 
advised Rama to befriend Vali, who is in power and a powerful one too, instead of Sugreeva. It is not 
so, is the reply from the viewpoint of dharma. This Kabandha has suffered his best in taking wrong routes 
and just now, he resurrected after making many amends, and he is supposed to advise Rama to go on a 
right path and to a right personality as Vali is already established as a pursuer of wrong path. But 
Vali when talking to Rama at his death time says that 'I would have brought Maithili in a single day, 
I would have roped Ravana and brought him like an animal tide with roe around its neck...' etc. But 
they are all his expressions at death-time-wisdom. He did not care for Tara's advices nor bothered to 
talk to Rama, as to why Sugreeva is instigated upon him. This being so, when immortal wisdom has dawned 
on Kabandha, he cannot ask Rama to tread a wrong path to get his task done. This is what the viewpoint 
of Dharmaakuutam. Though untranslated verbatim the above is the gist of the following.

[Commentary] kaarya siddi artham samprati bhaatru maatra sahaayyasya durdasha aarambaham praaptasya raamabhadrasya 
dR^iShTa balena daiva balena ca upeta durdashaayaaH samaapti praaptena sugriiveNa sandhi kaarama eva 
samucitam iti kabandhena uktam | tat anupapannam | yato valii sugriivaat adhika balaH - sakala vaanara 
senaa pari vR^itaH - sva raajye supratiShTito - raama kR^ita prati upakaara nirapekSho - raavaNa nigraha 
catura bhuja viirya upapatteh ca | maam eva yadi puurvam tvam etad artham acodayaH | maithilim aham 
eka aahnaa tava ca aaniitavaan bhaveH || 1-17-49 | raakShasam ca duraatmaanaam tava bhaarya apahaariNam 
| kaNThe baddhvaa pradadyaam te anihatam raavaNam raNe || 3-17-50 - iti jiiva graaham gR^ihiitvaa raNe 
vaa tan nihatya - - etaadR^isha saamarthyam avagamane sva kaarya saadhakaH ca | ata eva vaalinam apahaaya 
ataadR^ishaH sugriivaH katham upadiShTa iti cet na | satya api saamardhye dR^iptavaan - raavaNa mitratvaat 
raajya sthitatvaat - raama kR^ita upakaara nirapekShatvaat ca raama praathito vaalii sakhyam na angiikuryaad 
eva | aasanna mR^itunaa vaalinaa sakhya karaNam niShphalam ca || - - - satyapi saamardhye siitaam aaniiya 
daasyaami iti etaadR^isha buddheH shikShaNa anantara bhavitvena sakhya asakhyaayaam asambhavaat | sva 
paraakrameNa vinaa anyena saadhita artha angiikaraNasya kShatriyaaNaam adharmyatvaat |

[Commentary] This is to say that dharma is far beyond mere politics, whether monarchical or otherwise. To 
uphold that dharma, one has to undergo certain painful processes, that may be you, or we, or 
may they be godlike or godsend Rama or Lakshmana.



SARGA 73
------------------------------

[Text] Kabandha extols Pampa Lake and details Rama about the course to be adopted to proceed to Mt. Rishyamuka 
to befriend Sugreeva. He details about Matanga hermitage and implores upon Rama to visit an anchoress 
name Shabari, who is waiting for ages to have a glimpse of Rama.

Shlok 1: On showing a concept for questing after Seetha that context-sensitive Kabandha further spoke this sentence 
which is inclusive of right concept to Rama. [3-73-1]

Shlok 2- 3- 4- 5a: "Oh, Rama, have a recourse to westward, and where the trees of Rose-apple, Priyaala, Jackfruit, Plaksha, 
Banyan, Tinduka, Pipal, Karnikara, Mango, and others... and even trees like Dhanva, Naaga, Tilaka, Naktamaala, 
blue Ashoka, Kadamba, Karaviira, Agnimukha, Ashoka, red-sandalwood trees and Neem trees will be heart-pleasingly 
shining forth in full blossom, that alone is an optimistic course for you. [3-73-2, 3, 4, 5a]

[Commentary] The botanical terms for some of these trees are given to some of the above in the first chapter of Kishkindha.

Shlok 5b- 6a: "On shinning up those trees, or else, even on forcefully pelting those fruits down onto ground, then 
you may pelt over, devouring those ambrosial fruits... [3-73-5b, 6a]

Shlok 6b- 7a: "On crossing over that parkland, oh, Kakutstha, another parkland with blossomy flowers is there, which 
replicates the heavenly Nandana gardens, and a replica of North-Kuru, an all-endowing province... [3-73-6b, 
7a]

Shlok 7b- 8a: "Wherein the trees fruit all-season fruits that transude nectar, why fruits alone, in that parkland 
all seasons are coeval, as they will be in Caitraratha, the celestial gardens of Kubera... [3-73-7b, 
8a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: "In there, the trees bear enormous branches which will be crouching under the weight of their own fruits, 
and everywhere such trees will be shining forth like shiny clouds and shining mountains... [3-73-8b, 
9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: "Let Lakshmana present those ambrosial fruits to you either by climbing up those trees to pluck them, 
or else by pelting them to ground, according to his convenience... [3-73-9b-10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: "Peregrinating finest places by trekking from mountain to mountain, from forest to forest, oh, valorous 
ones, you will trek to an auspicious lotus-lake, called Pampa... [3-73-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 12a: "It is un-pebbly, un-slippery, un-weedy thereabouts, oh, Rama, equal are its quaysides and emersed are 
its sandbanks, red and blue lotuses beautify that Pampa Lake... [3-73-11b, 12a]

Shlok 12b-13a: "There the indwellers of Pampa Lake's waters, oh, Raghava, namely the swans, cranes, Kraunca-s and fish-hawks 
will be letting out peeps in tuneful voice... [3-73-12a, 13b]

Shlok 13b- 14a: "Thereabout birds will be unflustered on seeing humans, because they are artless to avoid hunting, because 
none kills them, and you may savour them because those birds will be best and burley, similar to ghee-gobs... 
[3-73-13b, 14a]

[Commentary] Comment: A word about Rama's vegetarianism or otherwise is incorporated at endnote.

Shlok 14b- 15- 16a: "Oh, Rama in that Pampa Lake there are best fishes, red-carps, and blunt-snouted small porpoises, and 
a sort of sprats, which are neither scraggy, nor with many fish-bones. Lakshmana will reverentially 
offer them to you on skewering them with arrow, and on broiling them on iron rod of arrow after descaling 
and de-finning them. [3-73-14b, 15, 16a]

Shlok 16b- 18a: "While you eat those fishes to satiety, Lakshmana will offer you the water of Pampa Lake, which will 
be in the bunches of flowers of that lake, and which will be lotus-scented, pellucid, comfortably cool, 
shiny like silver and crystal, uncontaminated and that way pristine, by lifting it up that water with 
lotus leaf, making that leaf a stoup-like basin... [3-73-16b, 17, 18a]

Shlok 18b- 19- 20a: "Oh, best one among men Rama, at Pampa you will see best shaped Vanara-s who have their bunk bed in 
mountain caves, and who will be coming nearby the lake, greedy as they are for water, and those forest 
movers will be moving about in evening time of the day, bellowing like bulls... oh, Rama, Lakshmana 
will show them to you... [3-73-18b, 19, 20a]

Shlok 20b- 21a: "While roving in the evenings, oh, Rama, should you see the serenely water of Pampa, with her trees 
garlanded with their own blooms and twigs, you will discard your own dolour... [3-73-20b, 21a]

[Commentary] The word viTapin was originally an adjective of vR^iksha, viTapi VR^iksha, meaning 
a tree having twigs. In the course of time the sense of vR^iksha was appropriated [by viTapin 
] to itself and the use of vR^iksha along with it fell out. There is no more conjecture. Pt. 
Satya Vrat in 'Ramayana - A Linguistic Study' and here twigs are upa lakshaNa for blooms and 
then, 'trees garlanded with its own blooms and twigs...'

Shlok 21b- 22a: "Oh, Raghava, there you will see highly delightful and wide-ranging trees like Tilaka and Naktamaala, 
and fully bloomed red and blue lotuses, as well... [3-73-21b, 22a]

Shlok 22b- 23a: "Oh, Raghava, there is none someone to inwreathe the garlands of those flowers, and indeed, they neither 
dry up, nor drop down... [3-73-22b, 23a]

Shlok 23b- 24- 25: "Erst there were self-collected sages, the disciples of Sage Matanga, and at one time while they were 
bringing the forest produce as ritual paraphernalia, they were much wearied by its weight and they were 
sweating... and all of those earthbound strings of sweat-drops that quickly dropped from their bodies 
were wafted by air onto trees, and on them they reoccurred as strings of flowers, by the merit of the 
ascesis of those sages... oh, Raghava, since those flowers have emerged from sweat-drops, they are imperishable, 
indeed... [3-73-23b, 24, 25]

[Commentary] The above wafting of sweat drops onto trees is as per Govindaraja. In another way, the sweat drops fell 
onto ground and from them trees grew up, and they flowered unwithered flowers - Then as they laboured 
through the dell / From limb and brow the heat-drops fell: / Thence sprang and bloomed those wondrous 
trees: - R.T.H. Griffith

Shlok 26: "Oh, Rama of Kakutstha, albeit the passing of those sages through the pearly gates, their maidservant, 
a long-lived one and an anchoress, named Shabari, can be seen there, even today... [3-73-26]

Shlok 27: "Oh, Rama, she who always stands by probity will depart to the sphere of heaven, on attending to you, 
for you are the referent to god, and a reverent for one and all... [3-73-27]

Shlok 28: "Oh, Rama, thereafter on your taking course to that western bank of Pampa Lake, oh, Kakutstha, there 
you will see the unequalled and arcane place of hermitage of sage Matanga... [3-73-28]

Shlok 29: "Sage Matanga so methodised that woodland, where even the elephants are rendered incapable to trespass 
in that hermitage of sage Matanga disturbing its serenity... [3-73-29]

Shlok 30- 31a: "Oh, the legatee of Raghu, that woodland which in simile is like a godly forest, similar to the heavenly 
Nandana gardens, overspread with divers birds is renowned as 'Matanga woodland', and oh, Rama, you will 
take delight rejoicingly in that woodland... [3-73-30, 31a]

Shlok 31b- 32: "In front of Pampa there is a bountiful but an unclimbable mountain is there with trees in full blossom, 
which is well-protected by baby elephants, and which in earlier times was purposefully created by Brahma, 
and that alone is Mt. Rishyamuka... [3-73-31b, 32]

[Commentary] It is difficult to climb this mountain hence Hanuma airlifted Rama and Lakshmana to Sugreeva. Brahma 
purposefully crafted it, as the only shelter to Sugreeva. Its flowers are ever blossomy and fruited 
to feed Sugreeva and the other four monkeys in exile. Baby elephants are enough to keep guard for that 
mountain, then why tell about the capacity of full grown ruttish elephants. This prearrangement is owing 
to the presage of Brahma.

Shlok 33: "And should a man sleep on the heights of that mountain, and should he dream of gaining some riches 
in that sleep, he gains that much when he wakes up... [3-73-33]

Shlok 34: "But he who is diabolic in his deportment and devilish in comportment, climbs that and hopes to sleep 
soundly, demons capture him while he is in sleep, and rough him up to death, there itself... [3-73-34]

Shlok 35: "Oh, Rama, there the blaring trumpet-blasts of baby elephants that amuse themselves at Lake Pampa, and 
of those that are the indwellers of Matanga hermitage, even there on Mt. Rishyamuka are audible... [3-73-35]

Shlok 36: "The mighty and massy dark-cloud coloured elephants will be hitting head-on, and with dripping blood 
streams on their jumbo heads and temples, they disperse and move about separately, only to come together 
for yet another round of head-to-head collision... [3-73-36]

Shlok 37- 38a: "There the elephants are quenched on drinking water of Pampa Lake, that is daintily clean, and neatly 
clear, springlike for touch, and in which all scents of flowers of that lake are included, and then 
they will be collectively re-entering the forests, for they are forest ranging elephants... [3-73-37, 
38a]

Shlok 38b- 39a: "On your seeing the bears, also thus the tigers and even the exultant sapphire-blue Rurus with black 
stripes there, you will discard your distress... [3-73-38b, 39a]

Shlok 39b- 40a: "But oh, Rama, a cavernous cave lidded with a boulder stone outshines on that mountain, and oh, Kakutstha, 
problematic is an entry into it... [3-73-39b, 40a]

Shlok 40b- 41a: "On its right at its eastern opening a delightful lake with highly coolant waters is there, fringed 
with divers trees and fraught with numerous tubers and fruits... [3-73-40b, 41a]

Shlok 41b- 42a: "Sugreeva dwells in that cave along with four other monkeys, and at times he will be available on the 
peaks of that mountain, even on its bluffs and cliffs, for he is a terrified monkey..." Thus Kabandha 
informed them. [3-73-41b, 42a]

Shlok 42b- 43a: That impressive Kabandha adorned with divine garlands and abiding in sky scintillating with the grandeur 
of the dazzle of the sun has bidden both the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana thus, awaited a bid adieu 
from them. [3-73-42b, 43a]

Shlok 43b- 44a: Rama and Lakshmana who started off on their peregrination said this sentence to that highly providential 
Kabandha, who is temporising in the sky in their vicinity, thus as "you may proceed..." [3-73-43b, 44a]

Shlok 44b- 45: On getting the orders for departure from those two brothers who are highly gladdened at the information 
given by Kabandha, he that Kabandha who is ready to exit, he further said to them thus, "proceed for 
the purpose of achieving your task..." [3-73-44b, 45]

Shlok 46: Kabandha who redeemed his divine form has now got an aureole around him, and while irradiance is tamping 
whole of his mien, he moved further up on sky and reappeared. And staying in the sky he pointed out 
at the side of Mt. Rishyamuka, and then he reiterated, "you befriend Sugreeva..."and then he vanished. 
[3-73-46]

[Commentary] Lakshmana's killing, dressing of birds and fishes, and Rama's munching them - is a heatedly debated 
topic in web forums of all sorts. Some commentators of Ramayana have totally contrived the above expressions, 
to give a touch of vegetarianism. Even when Rama killed Rohi animals as offerings to dead Jataayu, there 
also it is contrived to mean as some roots or tubers. When Seetha says to Ravana who came in the guise 
of Brahman friar, that Rama will fetch much meat and I offer that on cooking aamiSam aadaati puSkalam 
This also is contrived as some tubers and fruits.

[Commentary] This pro-Jain, pro-Buddhist touch of vegetarianism is an enforced virtue on Vedic-ism. The only and 
real vegetarians of India are the Jains, and Jainism is a 'holier than thou...' sect of Vedic-ism, for 
their hymns and biija akshara-s are nothing but the derivatives of Vedic hymns. But these are 
a fed up lot with the then overtures of the practisers of Vedic-ism, and cleaved themselves from Vedic-ism 
to form Jainism, and even today they stick to their principles of non-violence, even towards the tiniest 
ant. Then came this Buddhism, a 'peaceable than thou...' sect of the Vedic-ism, for their jaataka 
katha-s and other teachings are nothing but the Vedic lore. This ism, though called a peaceable 
one, meaning 'unwarlike...' has conducted many wars and is splintered manifoldly, only because of the 
overtures of its practisers, allowed by their patronising kings. There used to be another sect caar 
vaaka-s an 'intellectual than thou...' sect, but they are termed as nihilists atheists, non-believers 
etc., and their literature is totally ruined as they used to colloid with theists, demanding to prove 
god, materialistically. These are highly sophisticated, well-versed in all Veda-s, debaters with utmost 
precision. These three ism are not called separate religions than Vedic-ism, but a vaidika mata-s 
where mata is not a religion, but a philosophy, viewpoint, a darshana.

[Commentary] Any religion, sect, or a following when patronised by the local sovereign, acquires bullhorns and snake 
fangs and starts to invade others, keeping themselves under the shade of their patronising king. So 
is this Buddhism, and it attained its 'warlike' tarnish by the swordsmanship of Ashoka, the Great. Besides 
spoiling its own original and peaceable tenets, Buddhism has equally spoiled the Vedic-ism, by the time 
of Ashoka itself. Even Ashoka has not converted himself to Buddhism overnight, but after a series of 
studies. He was a Buddhist before Kalinga war, but warred and massacred Kalinga, and a Buddhist and 
butchery - does not go hand in hand. By the way, Buddhists are no vegetarians, including Ashoka, but 
his edicts ask all others to not to eat meat.

[Commentary] Even today verifiable are the dietary habits in the provinces where the preachers of Buddhism have gone 
or not sent, or rendered useless, say Bengal. The usual route of Buddhists of Ashoka's period is from 
Patna to Orissa, and to Andhra. And Andhra was stronghold of Buddhists, once when aacaarya naagarjuna 
was there, who established a Buddhist University in Andhra, to which students from far Japan used to 
come. Even today, excavations are going on and Buddhist edicts are coming out, around Naagarjuna Sagar 
dam. The other route from Andhra is to Sri Lanka, down south. The details about the itinerary of these 
Buddhists preachers, better call them as door-to-door campaigners of Ashoka's, greatness than Buddhism, 
can be found in their legend, the third sangiitini, masterminded by the mentor of Ashoka, namely
moggali puttastha vira, , someone like Gobbels of Hitler. And rampant was this pseudo-Buddhism 
in South India, much abetted by the then pseudo-Jainism, to where bhadra saalastha viira was 
sent on his way to mahaa taamra parNi dviipa present day Sri Lanka, headed by Ashoka's son 
Mahinda [Mahendra, and along with the sister of Ashoka,] besides, his duuta-s to the court 
Antiocus II Theos [grandson of Seleucus,] Ptolemy II Philadeliphus, King of Egypt; King Antigonus Gonatus 
of Macedon; King Alexander of Epirus... so on. Thus, they successfully propagated about Ashoka, rather 
than the tenets of pure Buddhism, and as a result, that Buddhism is corrupted, back home.

[Commentary] Though Buddha said at his last stage vaya dhamma sankara - appamadena sampadeta 'decay is an 
innate feature in all beings, acquire your salvation unfalteringly...' where appamaadena is
a pramaadena 'without, carelessness...' But the later time overenthusiastic practisers decayed 
Buddhism carefully and unfalteringly in its homeland. In these times of Ashoka, the customs and habits 
of Vedic-ism merged into the then pseudo-Buddhism, and a commixture of Vedic-ism and pseudo-Buddhism 
resurfaced, and Vedic-ism became pseudomorphic Brahmanism. Along with it, the dietary habits have changed 
completely, and vegetarianism of Jainism has come to stay, and thereafter it just turned to egg-tarianism, 
and presently going on to hamburger-ism and pizza-ism.

[Commentary] This being so, the orthodox Hinduism lays taboo on meat eating in respect of Brahmans only, that too 
by reckoning the eras, the Indian yuga theory. In satya yuga no distinctions recorded, 
in treat yuga, dwaapara yuga-s of Ramayana and Bharata times, Brahmins are permitted only some 
non-veg items, called prokshita aahaara as can be seen in Rama-Vali conversation, and sage 
Agastya bans ram's meat, that too only for Brahmins, after Vaataapi-Ilvala episode. In kali yuga 
non-veg is completely banned for Brahmins, not by scriptures, but by the impact of the then despots 
of pseudo-Buddhism. The kali puruSa is entered through Duryodhana in dwaapara yuga 
of Maha Bharata time, but somehow world is saved by Krishna and Arjuna. Now we with a sarcastic affection 
call that kali has entered through Ashoka, and kali yuga is the period dating from 
Ashoka's despotic days. When a state of topsy-turviness occurs to Veda-s themselves in kali yuga 
, where Veda-s are breathing their last at present, there is nothing to speak of dietary habits of those 
eras.

[Commentary] There are many web pages saying or objecting that Rama is a practiser of a himsa not non-violence 
of Jains, but non-butchery of living beings. Valmiki never said that Rama is a Buddhist Monk 
or a vardhamaana, tiirthankara of Jainism, but depicted him as Hindu Kshatriya, and no taboo 
is prescribed to this warring class in eating meat or chicken. Yet the lamentation will be like this: 
"Lord Rama, a great, divine exemplar of dharma and virtue for Hindus, himself apparently doesn't care 
much for vegetarianism and ahimsa..." "[Rama:] 'I must to lonely wilds repair, abstain from flesh, and 
living there on roots, fruit, honey, hermit's food, pass twice seven years (14 yrs.) in solitude. To 
Bharata's hand the king will yield the regent power I thought to wield, and me, a hermit, will he send 
my days in Dandak wood to spend.' " -- Ramayana 2:20. [Griffith, Ralph T.H. The Ramayana of Valmiki: 
translated into English verse. Benares: E.J. Lazarus & Co., 1895. p.117]. It may please be noted that 
vegetarianism is different from non-violence and it belongs only to Jain tenets, and later to Gandhian 
principles, but not to Hindus or Buddhists. The meaning of the above verse is 'being a hermit I will 
abstain from food that inculcates raajasa, taamasa pravR^itti an aggressive, assaulting mood... 
where certain kinds of meat stuff cause an aggressive mood...' and Griffith had his own metrical exigencies 
to incorporate all the subtexts and underlined meanings in those iambics. It is unclear as to why hairs 
are counted on eggshells, without grasping the essence of the epic's idea of eliminating vice, where 
vice is Ravana and his diabolic activities. Rama's character may not be taken as a meek, weak, bleak 
backbencher, but take it as a blitzkrieg assaulter, aggressive invader, that too only on vice. If he 
were not to kill an edible animal how can he create a holocaustic extirpator of demons in the last episodes 
of the epic, or shall he start chanting on battlefield dhammam sharaNam gaccaami, sangam sharaNam 
gaccami that too, to Ravana - needs to be explored. Firstly let us ask ourselves whether we want 
a Ravana or a Rama, whether they eat meat, chicken 65, or biryaani, or Italian ice creams.

[Commentary] Whether Rama is a god or no god, he is the princely Kshatriya, and if a warrior Kshatriya subsists on 
tubers and fruits, and on other insipid food, we can imagine how grand his warfare would be. If Rama 
were to be a god, why God created a big fish that eats a small fish, why birds and animals of prey, 
and why a niSaada that kills a bird at the start of Ramayana. Hence, taking dietary habits 
as acquired habits, but not godsend or tabooed ordinances of scriptures, the meanings of these verses 
of Kabandha are not contrived to establish any vegetarianism. Incidentally, these are the advices of 
raw-flesh eating Kabandha and we do not see Rama feasting comfortably on birds, fish, or on Kentucky 
chicken, at Pampa.



SARGA 74
------------------------------

[Text] Shabari is emancipated from mortality after her showing Matanga hermitage to Rama. Both the brothers 
approach Shabari as said by Kabandha and she adores them on their seeking her presence. She honours 
them as visitant guests and expresses her desire to depart to the spheres where her teachers are. Rama 
gives consent to it, on which she offers herself into fire and emerges as a divine angel, to ascend 
to heaven.

Shlok 1: Both the sons of that best king Dasharatha, on taking up westerly path in that forest travelled on the 
passage to Pampa as shown by Kabandha. [3-74-1]

Shlok 2: Those two, Rama and Lakshmana, while seeing several of the ticketed trees on mountains which have nectarous 
fruits on them moved forward to see Sugreeva. [3-74-2]

Shlok 3: Those two legatees of Raghu on making a sojourn on the mountaintop, they the Raghava-s drew nigh of 
the moorland on the westward of Pampa Lake. [3-74-3]

Shlok 4: Then on getting at the westward moorland of that lotus-lake Pampa, there those two have spotted the 
idyllic hermitage of Shabari. [3-74-4]

Shlok 5: On getting at that hermitage and on perusing at that picturesque environ that is wreathed round with 
several picturesque trees, those two came nigh of Shabari. [3-74-5]

Shlok 6: On seeing them that sublimated yogi Shabari instinctively made palm-fold, got up imperatively, and then 
she braced the feet of Rama, and even that of sagacious Lakshmana, impressively. [3-74-6]

Shlok 7: She gave them water for feet-wash and mouthwash, and other viands customarily affordable to visitants, 
and then Rama asked after that anchoress who is unflinchingly abiding in her duty. [3-74-7]

Shlok 8: "Oh, ascetically wealthy lady, perchance your deterrents in ascesis are completely overcome, somehow... 
your ascetic practises culminating, someway... your annoyances and ailments are adjusted, somewhat... 
isn't it! [3-74-8]

[Commentary] The word kaccit is a phatic expression like 'isn't it?' but without question mark, as a statement 
of reasoning out as in hai naa, hai kyaa.../ illeyaa.../ kadaa... But it had to be said here 
in a roundabout way. The detrimental factors for loosing balance of mind, as asked by Rama, are 
kaama, krodha, lobha: tri vidham narakasya idam dvaaram naashanam aatmanaH | kaamaH krodhaH tathaa lobhaH 
tasmaat etat trayam tyajet || 16-21 Gita. The Doors of Hell / Are threefold, whereby men to ruin 
pass,- / The door of Lust, the door of Wrath, the door / Of Avarice. Let a man shun those three! - Sir 
E. Arnold.

Shlok 9: "Oh, suave speaker, mayhap your sacred commitments are achieved, anywise... appeased is your self, anyway... 
and your subservience to your mentors brought to fruition, perchance... isn't it!" Thus Rama enquired 
with Shabari. [3-74-9]

Shlok 10: When Rama asked her in this way she that Shabari who is a senescent anchoress, sublimated yogin and 
an adherent to the sublimated yogis of higher rank, informed Rama remaining in his vis-ï¿½-vis. [3-74-10]

Shlok 11: "Just now, on your pleasing manifestation before me my ascesis is accomplished, and now only my birth 
is fructified, and now only my subservience to my mentors is well hallowed... [3-74-11]

[Commentary] Annex: 'My dear boy, you are so late... having come too lately how is that you ask whether everything 
is sanctified or beatified long back and there is nothing for you to do... here I am too bored to stay 
in this withered body and I am longing to go to my gurus' place to serve them... not that they are in 
need of any maidservant, but I need much to be in their presence as a maidservant... whether you are 
god or no god... that is not my concern... my teachers told me to stay here until your arrival... and 
you have arrived now, so fructified is my teachers' saying... what is the result of subservience to 
teachers... release, deliverance, etc., thus my teachers said... so I got it just now... that way, what 
is it a commoner birthed on earth wishes... an emancipation from the cycle of births and deaths... so 
my teachers said... thus I got it just now... on envisioning you... I know that you are unknowable, 
thus said my teachers, but I have known you, because I have seen you... hence I am redeemed by my gurus... 
this is the resultant factor of my unswerving servitude to my teachers... by the way, my teachers used 
to say about it quoting from some sweta Upanishad... now I am unable to recollect it... Lakshmana, 
can you recite it for me...' Lakshmana: yasya deve paraa bhaktiH yathaa deve tathaa gurau | tasya 
ete kathitaa hi arthaaH prakaashante mahaatmaaH |prakaashante mahaatmana iti | shvetaashvataropanishad 
6-23 'for a noble soul who reposes devotion in god, and an equal devotion in his teacher, to such 
a noble soul all truths manifests themselves... to such a noble soul all truths manifests themselves...' 
Shabari: Yes, yes, so also I stand ennobled after envisaging you, just now...'

Shlok 12: "Oh, best one among men, now all my ascesis is fructified when I personally worshiped you, who are none 
other than the best god among gods, thus the heaven will also be there for me... [3-74-12]

[Commentary] Annex: 'thus my teachers were discussing about you when you were in Chitrakuta... but I have no knowledge 
about you or your Being... as said by my teachers you have come, thus my teachers' words came true... 
then you must be that 'Being' according to my feminine logic... and I could personally see you with 
theses hazy, foggy mortal eyes, which my teachers could not... am I to self-ascertain that I edge over 
my teachers, though I have not performed any rituals or ceremonies, which my decrepit and doddering 
teachers painfully did... not so, it is their way of knowing you and this my way of reaching you... 
they also said that there is a returnless sphere, apart from brahma loka, indra loka... 'abode 
of Brahma or paradise of Indra...' and when I was saying 'heaven to me...' I intended that returnless 
'heaven...' to where my teachers have gone, as they did not wish to go to Indra's paradise to enjoy 
the dance programs of Rambha or Tilottama, as said by Gita 8-16: aabrahma bhuvana lokaaH punar aavartino 
arjuna | maam upetya tu kaunteya punar janma na vidyate || The worlds, Arjuna!- even Brahma's world- 
/ Roll back again from Death to Life's unrest; / But they, O Kunti's Son! that reach to Me, / Taste 
birth no more. - Sir E. Arnold.

Shlok 13: "Oh, kind one, your blessed sight has sanctified me... and oh, endower of respect, by your beneficence 
I wish to go to those returnless worlds because I have subjugated those enemies of yours, viz.,
ari SaD varga-s in me, and I think my prayer to you is justified because 
you are a subjugator of such enemies... [3-74-13]

[Commentary] Annex: 'Now that you have come I conclude you to be that "Absolute' and I repose the same faith and 
confidence in you which I have for my mentors... hence give me the worlds of no return, to where my 
preceptors went...' 'Or, tava saumyena cakshuSaa by your magnanimous visual acuity, gratis 
visualis, puutaa asmi I am depurated of all of my three fates, sancita, aagaami, praarabdha 
karma-s, hence, oh, enemy subjugator, subdue all enemies in me, ari SaD varga - kaama, krodha, 
lobha, moha, mada, maastarya, even the present lobha, moha for a returnless world, and 
then tvat prasaadaat by your grace; nirhetuka dayaa kaTaaksha prasaadaat, your unconditional 
salvation, salvas gratis, grant me those returnless worlds...' Govindaraja. Ravana's ten heads are identified 
with the above six negativities plus four more as - kama  lust; krodha  anger;
lobha greed; moha  delusion; mada  pride; maatsarya : envy; 
manas : mind; buddhi intellect; chitta  will; ahamkara  ego.

Shlok 14: "Divine aircrafts of unequalled refulgence have lifted those disciples of Sage Matanga in whose tendance 
I was, to welkin on your arriving at Chitrakuta... [3-74-14]

Shlok 15: "Those knowers of probity, highly providential, and eminent-saints have told me, 'Rama will come to 
this highly blest hermitage of yours along with Soumitri... and you have to cordially welcome them as 
your guests, and on your seeing him you will go to best worlds, where merit remains undiminished...' 
[3-74-15, 16]

[Commentary] This suggests that subservience to preceptors will generate the merit that causes deliverance to the 
student or servant by the active participation of the deliverer. The best world or sphere, or state 
attainable by soul-searching individuals is kaivalya whereas seeing that deliverer with one's 
own eyes bhagavad avalokana, is far beyond these worlds or states with nomenclature, and it 
is mukti, salvation from life cycles. Govindaraja

Shlok 17: "Oh, best one among men Rama, thus I was told by those highly providential sages, oh, best one among 
men, oh, manly tiger, and I have gleaned various forest fruits and eatables that occur on the moorlands 
of Pampa Lake for your sake..." So said Shabari to Rama. [3-74-17]

[Commentary] Out of the three epithets for Rama, the twice-repeated epithet is puruSarSabha has two different 
meanings in vernacular translations. One is the usual intensifier puruSa R^iSabha 'bull among 
men...' where The Bull is the bull from the zodiacal sign or constellation Taurus to that of stock exchanges. 
And it is Latin bulla 'rounded object', in medieval Latin 'seal' or Latin bullire 'to bubble', from 
bulla 'bubble' etc., where Rama is the rounded off seal for kingship, and even known for his bubbly 
fermentation to deal with atrocities. The other is puruSa tilaka 'the vermilion mark one the 
forehead of mankind...' rather the husband of mankind, or the husbandman for mankind who cultivates 
good on the earth as a farmer, after weeding out the weeds called evils. The version of Gita Press has 
this as the 'flower of humanity...'

[Commentary] And then it is said in vernacular translations as a 'bullish man' is for his impetuousness and aggressiveness 
towards evil called Ravana, when he started from Ayodhya. The second is to tell that he is a yeoman, 
a man holding and cultivating a small landed estate, taking care of every weed or withering plant, as 
he has come to see Shabari, and Shabari like an old plant did not stir out. The third is puruSa 
vyaaghra 'manly tiger...' but this is actually 'man, the lion...' and if a lion sets out he will 
not take a back step until his pursuit is fulfilled. Thus Shabari is given the lines with three epithets 
to Rama, as she is already in the know of this Rama, and now on seeing him personally, some divine wisdom 
dawned and she is able to foresee what this man, rather this lion, is going to achieve at end point. 
We glean these meanings, one, or two, and we appeal to Sanskrit pundits to derive which epithet is used 
with which purpose, once again.

[Commentary] By the way, where is the scene of Rama eating fruits and eatables bitten and tasted by Shabari? Has 
this old woman not offered the fruits to the guests, or just said that they are available? We listen 
many stories and see many pictures telling that she gave many fruits after biting them with her own 
teeth to test the taste. All that is not in Valmiki Ramayana. This amplification is from Padma Purana.
phalaani ca supakvaani muulaani madhuraaNi ca | svayam aasaadya maadhuryam pariikShya paribhakShya 
ca | pashcaat nivedayaamaasa raaghaabhyaam dhR^iDhvrataa |

Shlok 18b- 19a: When that graceful souled Rama is addressed thus by Shabari, he that Raghava enquiringly said this to 
that Shabari who is never ever debarred from esoteric knowledge and gnosis. [3-74-18b, 19a]

[Commentary] 'though ignoble by birth...' is the assumed finishing line. There are many exclamations and arguments 
for and against this caste oriented banalities. So taking by those days we may find the characters of 
this Shabari, tribal king Guha, Dasharatha's minister Sumantra, and the like and then we may examine 
how much the so-called outcaste is cared for or sought after. They may be ineligible to perform ritual 
deeds but none is barred from esoteric knowledge.

Shlok 19b- 20a: "Your and your preceptors' effectiveness is heard in effect from the wraith of the great souled Danu's 
son, Kabandha, and if you feel showing it like I wish to clearly see it, personally..." Thus Rama asked 
her to show hermitage. [3-74-19b, 20a]

[Commentary] He is rather showing that hermitage to us in order to emphasise the path followed by the disciples of 
Matanga, whom this Shabari served that laboriously.

Shlok 20b- 21a: On hearing those words voiced by Rama, Shabari started to show that unique woodland to both of them. 
[3-74-20]

Shlok 21b-22: "Oh, Rama the delight of Raghu's lineage... this one comparable to a crammed cloud that would be ever 
ready to yield much cherished cloudbursts, and compacted with animals and birds that are ever ready 
to enjoy seasonable rains, is that hermitage to which you have come, that way this woodland is well 
known as Matanga, meaning a cloud, or an elephant, or an elephantine cloud that showers blessings on 
all... and oh, highly resplendent Rama, you may see this nest, snuggery, where those contemplative souls, 
my teachers, used to conduct oblations into the Ritual-fires, orienting and worshipping them with Vedic 
hymns... [3-74-21b, 22]

[Commentary] There is another shade with a little different wording cakruH analam mantravat mantra kovidaaH 
meaning mantra kovidaaH experts in hymns; mantravat hymn oriented; analam 
Ritual-fire; juhaavaan oblations in fire; cakruH conducted, worshipped.

Shlok 23: "Where those great sages that are highly revered by me used to offer flowers with their extremely doddery 
hands in the worship the Altar of Fire, this alone is that Altar of Fire raised at western end... [3-74-23]

[Commentary] The Altar of Fire is the sanctum sanctorum of Vedic-ritual, like that of present day temples. It took 
some two hours for Rama to enter such a hermitage of Agastya, that too after Agastya's permission. Now 
a so-called low-caste woman is able to detail about it, naming by their technical names as pratyak 
stalii vedi, praacii sthalii vedi, puSpopahaaram, and she is detailing their acts of doddery worship, 
sympathetically. Hence, she should be in proximity at those places when her preceptors actually worshipped 
the fire offerings. That way, she is a bahiSkR^itaam - api samiipaat ' not, debarred lady, 
even, from the proximity' of Vedic-rituals. These Vedic time yanGYa-s were more secular than 
the present day commercial temple complexes, cf., ashva medha yaGYa in Bala Kanda. Nobody debars 
any in such Vedic ceremonies, but some are not expected to perform them personally, again cf., Vishvamitra-Trishanku 
episodes. If everybody becomes a Bishop, who will be remaining for appointment as pastoral staff? The 
Reverend Bishop is the Bishop, but staffers are many.

Shlok 24: "Oh, best one from Raghu-s, by the efficacy of the ascesis of my teachers these Altars of Fire are with 
incomparable irradiance, and even now they are irradiating all of the directions with solemnity... see 
them... [3-74-24]

Shlok 25: "Enervated by dieting and straining they were incapable to go for sea bathing, and just at their thought 
process all the seven seas came close by, in coalescence... see them... [3-74-25]

[Commentary] That is why Pampa Lake is held sacred. Instead of rivers going into sea, seas flowed back to form this 
lake for the sake of these old sages. Sea bathing is the best, river bathing is of medium merit, and 
bathing with well or vessel water is worst, in terms of holy baths.

Shlok 26: "On performing holy baths those sages have spread their jute cloths on those trees with their own doddering 
hands here at this place and oh, Raghu's legatee, those cloths did not dry even now by the touch of 
their hands... [3-74-26]

Shlok 27: "Which garlands they have knotted together with black-lotuses and other flowers while they were worshiping 
gods, these are really those garlands, and indeed there is no discolouration to them... [3-74-27]

Shlok 28: "You have seen what is seeable and you have listened what is listenable of this woodland in its entirety... 
thereby I wish to become a permittee, where you alone are my permitter, as I wish to castaway this sheathe 
of soul, called my body... to make that soul to move nigh of my teachers feet... [3-74-28]

Shlok 29: "Of which sages this hermitage is, and of which sages I am also a maidservant, I soulfully go the proximity 
of those contemplative souls..." Thus, she appealed to Rama. [3-74-29]

Shlok 30: Rama on hearing those duty-congruous words of Shabari along with Lakshmana, obtained a uniquely high 
rejoice and he also said, "astonishing is this..." [3-74-30]

[Commentary] Annex: 'astonishing is this hermitage and its inmates... where the inmates praise their bygone masters, 
as said at gurum prakaashayet dhiimaan 'gurus are to be extolled by true and wise disciples...' 
and the masters made the environ blissfully livable, all this is without any maya or magic... so, fairness 
has its own place...'

Shlok 31: Then Rama spoke to that Shabari who is firmed up in her faith towards her masters, "oh, saintly lady, 
you treated me with deference... thus may go to your cherished worlds, where you can solace yourself 
with your masters... [3-74-31]

Shlok 32- 33a: Thus that way said by Rama in consent, she who is wearing tufty-matted hair, jute-cloths, and deerskin 
as her clothing, she offered herself as an oblation into Ritual-fire, and then like a flaring fire, 
she went to heaven alone. [3-74-32, 33a]

Shlok 33b- 34: Now she appeared as an angle bejewelled with angelic ornaments, wearing angle's wraparound and angelical 
flowery tassels, and bedaubed with suchlike cosmetics, and as with the scintillations of electric sparks 
she scintillated that province. [3-74-33b, 34]

Shlok 35: Shabari who is a perfect yogin with perfected meditative concentration, now went to that sanctum locus 
where the blest souls of those sublime sages, namely her masters, saunter. [3-74-35]

[Commentary] For this Dharmaakuutam says: tat udiiritam ati dharmiShTham vacanam aakarNya harSha nirbhara maanaso 
raameNa samauGYaataa shavarii bhujagii iva jiirNaam tvacaam tanum hutaashane nikShipya divya maalyaa 
ambara dharaa shirasaa raamam praNamya guru jana maNDala kR^itam puNya sthalam jagaama || dk She 
left her body as a female serpent does in its ecdysis. This metaphor of a snake shedding off skin is 
repeated time and again in Ramayana and here the commentator is using it. This is indicative of the 
thousand hooded serpent aadiseSa who guards Vishnu like a mosquito net. The fibre like sheath 
released by a snake will be beautiful for a look as it glitters with all the charms of a charming snake. 
The minute you finger it, of course when snake went a long way off, then that sheath splinters in hundreds 
of pieces. That is why this metaphor is used to suggest the world as viSNu maya, which remains 
beautiful and if touched shatters all misconceptions. Saint-singer Tyaagaraaya has a kR^iti 
on this pannagapu doma tera paikettavemayyaâ¦ So Shabari is rid of that illusion, or mayaâ¦

[Commentary] At the outset let us say that there is no Hinduism as such but bhaaratiiya sanskR^iti is there, 
and that is not concentrated in an around Indus valley alone. So also there is no caste system in India, 
but it is to be called varNa, varga categorisation, class, social stratification etc. Oxford 
has this to say for the word caste - Spanish and Portuguese casta 'lineage, race, breed', fem. of casto 
'pure, chaste' and we are still lingering ourselves to the unwitting misnomer of Portuguese. In Ch. 
1 of Bala Kanda, we put this as - Brahman - teacher-class; Kshatriya - ruler-class; Vyshya - trader-class; 
Shudra - worker-class. And if the word 'class' is also a pungent word let us use this Latin word 
classis 'assembly...' a near relative of varNa, varga and which does not mean the colour 
of skin, but it is meant to be a group. Thus the groups or assemblages are classis of intelligentsia 
and classis of sovereignty and classis of commerce and classis of peasantry or 
smithery or its various branches. Unfortunately, this word is mixed up to mean nonsense, and it 
remained to mean only as 'casta' of Portuguese. If it were to mean bloodline, race, or caste, then to 
which bloodline Kshatriya-s belong, either to Solar dynasty or to Lunar dynasty. Likewise to which bloodline 
the many kinds of Brahmans, say Vaidic, Niyogi, Bhatt, Caturvedi, Dwivedi, Iyer, Iyyangar, Namboodri 
etc., belong. By the way, what is the caste of Parashu Rama, or Bhaargava Rama, the sixth incarnation 
of Vishnu on earth and generally ascribed as a Brahman? His father is Jamadagni, said to be a Brahman, 
and his mother is Satyavati, the sister of Vishvamitra, a Kshatriya. Thus, the present day confusion 
and wrong terminology do not apply to Vedic times, because they believed in the 'seed-and-field syndrome'
biija kshetra nyaaya and perhaps a phenomenon recently found may match it - ``when we look 
at the Y-chromosome DNA, we see a very different pattern. The lower castes are most similar to Asians, 
and the upper castes are more European than Asian... Further, when we look at the different components 
within the upper caste, the group with the greatest European similarity of all is the warrior class, 
the Kshatriya, who are still at the top of the Hindu castes, with the Brahmins... But the Brahmins, 
in terms of their Y-chromosomes, are a little bit more Asian - So the genetic results are consistent 
with historical accounts that women sometimes marry into higher caste, resulting in female gene flow 
between adjacent castes. In contrast, males seldom change castes, so Y chromosome'' so says geneticist 
Lynn Jorde of the University of Utah.

[Commentary] This discussion has its orientation in the word shramaNii prefixed to Shabari, which originally 
means a Hindu wandering friar, not to be confused with the monk of Buddhism. Many take her to be a tribal 
or lowborn woman, and puzzle about the availability of Vedic knowledge or yogic practise to her. It 
is pertinent to ask why lowborn people and women were not authorised to perform Vedic rituals. We may 
see the queens of Dasharatha have performed Ashvamedha ritual in Bala Kanda. So women are not barred. 
Then the classis laboris had a different kind of labour to undertake, than this relax -less 
labour of rituals. So, their manpower was used that way and the brainpower of these Vedic pundits was 
used this way. The difference belonged more to the occupational interests than congenital inheritance. 
The lateral thinking or the vertical thinking changed them, and it is now we have a counter-culture 
than that of Vedic times. We still see sons and daughter of film actors, industrialists, or politicians 
becoming father-like, but sons of washermen and shore-makers are turning out differently.

[Commentary] Though Shabari is given a direct charge-free flight to heaven but poor Shambuka, another shuudra, is 
eliminated by Rama. Shambuka is neither a poor, innocent, meekish shuudra. He had to be eliminated when 
he was practising haTha yoga 'meditating upside down...' only to conquer the world with his 
negative logic like Ravana. He is not even a Yogi, but a bhogi, enjoyer and one who started 
his mission with half-knowledge with para apakaara dharma. But Shabari is a yogin by her
aatma samaadhi, that too a reverential lady by her steadfastness in what she believed sva 
dharma.

[Commentary] Regarding the accessibility of Vedas or Vedic knowledge to each and every body, the first question that 
arises is 'what for it is required by everyone?' If the answer is 'to know what Vedas say...' then the 
reply is, 'sun rises in east, cloud brings rain, so it is to be worshipped, and beyond it there are 
some forces to cause all this, so they are to be known, by which you obtain heaven... this Vedas say...' 
Therefore, this knowledge was unnecessary for the commoners in those days, because they were on heaven-like 
earth, so we presume by epics. And there are no such episodes where such questions were raised by some 
characters. Even Vali, a vanara was an adherer of Veda-s. This knowledge is now sought for because earth 
is turning into hell. But if Vedas are required for practising to purchase a direct ticket to heaven, 
the episode of Trishanku is there to tell us what sort of heaven we gain by short-cut methods. Even 
if they are taught to one and all and all sit chanting those hymns, since it appears to be an easy job 
to chant un-understandable hymns, gone is the agriculture, commerce, defence etc., to dogs.

[Commentary] Such a state of turmoil has occurred with the advent of Buddhism and its relative conversions. Then 
the Magadha and Maurya empires have utterly outdone the Kshatriya-s, by hiring mercenaries as their 
army. When the defence of a tradition itself is defeated then that tradition had to crumble, and in 
to that crumbling tradition, many outlandish traditions have intruded to intermingle, so says our known 
history. But when the question of - caste vs. Vedas - arises, there are many caste-less characters in 
Veda made eligible to learn Vedas, for e.g., Jaabaala Satyakaama, vide channdogya upaishad 
4-4-1 to 4-4-5. Adi Shankara's commentary on Brahma sutra-s 34-38 refuses the right of practising Vedas 
by Shudra-s, but his maniiSaa pancakam salutes a caNDaala - caNDaalo astu sa tu dvijostu... 
'may he be a Brahman or a Profaner, salute him [who has right knowledge about the Absolute...] This 
appears self-contradictory, but not so, because the ritual acts are prohibitive to women and shuudra-s, 
but not knowledge or personal excellence in it. Admittance of everyone in every sphere of activity is 
as good as admitting a nondescript into an operation theatre when heart transplantation is going on. 
Or, asking an airhostess to build a space shuttle because she has more flight hours on her record. Why 
all of them, some categories of Brahmans are not allowed in certain areas of rituals though conducted 
by Brahmans. Vedas say that it is a difficult path to follow them: uttiShTha jaagrata praapya varaan 
nibodhata | kShurasya dhaaraa nishitaa dur atyayaa duram pathaH tat kavayo vayanti || 1-3-14 kaThopaishad 
'Arise Awake, resort to best teachers to know 'That...' it is a walk on the razor's edge, difficult 
to follow, so the wise say...' then, why walk on a razor blade when air-conditioned roads of VB, Java, 
C , Oracle are there, like Vishvamitra who has taken many chapters to become Brahmin pundit, for no 
practical purpose. Vedic culture is different to Puranic culture, Puranic culture differs with epical, 
where examples are Lakshmana's boundary line to Seetha, and Shabari's tasting fruits before giving them 
to Rama, from Padma Purana, and everything or anything of that time is unavailable now, except these 
palm-leaf books and this pseudo-casteism. Anyway, let bygones be bygones, and let Veda or Vedic knowledge 
remain in a showcase of some archaeological museum, and let us revert to the story telling. So in conclusion 
it is to be said whether Shabari is the Spanish casto lady or Indian shramaNi she got what 
she wanted by her own sva dharma , and the portrayal of her divinity in the last but one verse 
is enough to tell whether she is lowborn human, or high-rising angle.

[Commentary] Though we may not elicit the caste, creed, or classis of Shabari, but she is an important Yogic character 
according the viewpoint of Yoga on Ramayana. In Yoga kunDalini 'the cosmic power in living 
being...' has a good part to play. It flows though the Sympathetic and Para-sympathetic ganglions though 
bio plexuses. If we take Ramayana as a humanoid epic, and the gist of the epic as its life force, that 
force has an upward movement via these ganglions. By the boons of Kaika this Ã©lan vital of Ramayana 
has moved from its serpentine coil reposing in muula aadhaara cakra sacro-coccygeal plexus, 
and reaches svaadhiSTaana cakra sacral plexus, when Bharata takes Rama's sandals to enthrone, 
and then it ascends and spends time in maNipuuraka cakra, the lumbar plexus, in the solacing 
laps of great saints and hermits like Atri, Anasuya, Agastya, and then it ascends and listens to the 
noise made by Kabandha at anaahata cakra cardiac plexus, where an aahata is 'un beaten...' 
a sound made without any external beating, the lub-dub beating of heart. That noise of heart will be 
unbearably noisy for cardiac patients. So is the thunderous voicing of Kabandha on his entry. This Ã©lan 
vital of Ramayana, which started with its primeval pureness, touches water and fire in earlier plexuses 
and now is ready to touch air at cardiac plexus. And air wants an egress and the story wants to go to 
the next plexus vi shuddha cakra 'very clean, pure, friendly and pleasant area...' laryngeal 
plexus, that of clean Pampa, pure vanara-s, friendly Sugreeva, Hanuma, and pleasant Rishyamuka. But 
where is outlet for that agonised 'airing of heart' of the epic? Frail Shabari is that slender duct-stem 
of a lotus, and through her, viz., on exiting her, the story enters into an area where the problems 
of the characters can be explained to other characters. Having spent some time there, then it enters
aaGYaa cakra the ordering plexus in between brows. One does what his mind orders. Here that 
mind is Sugreeva and irrefutable are his orders. When vishuddha cakra is available at throat,
svaadhiSTaana cakra is there at sacral place. The area from throat to sacrum is madhya 
kuuTa Vali's birth is from this place and Sugreeva's birth is from throat of their father turned 
mother. And what that is throated by Sugreeva is the activity of aaGYaa cakra and Seetha is 
found thereby... - after raamayaNa paramaartham by Dr. Ilapaavuluuri Panduranga Rao, a T.T.D 
publication.



SARGA 75
------------------------------

[Text] Rama arrives at the auspicious Pampa Lake according to the suggestion of Kabandha. On seeing that pious 
environ of that lake Rama has a breather and he expects some good to happen now. On further beholding 
the ladylike Pampa Lake, his thoughts move to Seetha, and he is again dispirited. However, on overcoming 
that short spell of his anguish, he proceeds with Lakshmana to the nearby of the lake.

Shlok 1: While Shabari ascended to heaven with her own divine self-resplendence, Raghava who is with Lakshmana 
started to cogitate over the magnificence of Matanga disciples. [3-75-1]

Shlok 2: That noble-souled Raghava on thinking about the efficacy of the disciples of Matanga, said to Lakshmana, 
who is the maintainer of Rama's well being, and who is thinking single-mindedly. [3-75-2]

[Commentary] Rama's thinking is that 'I happened to see a lady of unswerving loyalty to her teachers, by which adoration 
alone she is going to her desired worlds, and seeing such pious people will definitely yield good results 
from now on... hence some good shall betide us for we could have a glimpse of pious place and person 
puNya sthala, puNya purusa, puNya aatma sandarshana...'  and Lakshmana thinking is 'this lady has served 
her teachers with such a devotion by which she is going to the heavens she desired, where placements 
in heavens will usually be determined by their relative merits... am I serving my brother, teacher, 
god, and the like... namely Rama, to have an iota of Shabari's merit... or, all the problems to Rama 
have chanced by my neglect of my duty...'

Shlok 3: "I have seen a highly astounding hermitage of self-controlled sages, oh, gentle Lakshmana, in which 
the deer and tigers are at home, and which is adored by divers birds... [3-75-3]

Shlok 4: "Oh, Lakshmana, holy is our taking a bath in this holy Pampa Lake, for it is formed by the waters of 
seven seas, and even holier is our oblation of this holy waters to manes... [3-75-4]

Shlok 5- 6a: "What that was unpropitious for us is completely abated by our holy bath and holy oblations, oh, Lakshmana, 
propitiousness is standing en face us, thereby presently this heart of mine is highly gladdening... 
oh, lion-like man, indeed, heart alone hatches hope... [3-75-5, 6a]

Shlok 6b- 7-8a: "Thereby, where Mt. Rishyamuka is beaming forth at its nearby, on which that right minded son of the 
Sun, Sugreeva, is living along with four other vanara-s, always frightened by the fear from Vali, we 
will go to her, to that spectacular Lake Pampa, come on, Lakshmana... [3-75-6b, 7, 8a]

Shlok 8b- 9a: "I am also hasty to see that best one among vanara-s, Sugreeva, for my enterprise called search for 
Seetha is under his aegis, isn't it... [3-75-8b, 9a]

Shlok 9b- 10a: To that brave Rama who is speaking thus, Soumitri said this, " my heart too is hastening me, let us 
go there promptly..." [3-75-9b, 10a]

Shlok 10b- 11a: Then that Lord of People and Lord of Nature on exiting from that hermitage, he then came nigh of Lake 
Pampa along with Lakshmana. [3-75-10b, 11a]

Shlok 11b- 12- 13: Rama on scrutinising that rosy woodland in which everywhere there are outsized and diverse trees that 
are thickset with flowers, and different lakes loaded with the trilling birds like plovers, peacocks, 
waterfowls and suchlike, with which that woodland itself is trilling in much ado, became impassioned 
as he is instantly rendered thus by Love-god, and thus that Rama went towards that lovely Lake Pampa. 
[3-75-11b, 12, 13]

[Commentary] Vividly: The pronoun saH  is continuously repeated word denoting 'such as he is...' when used as opening 
word in first foot, as used in next verse, until the first verse of next canto. This expression, 'such 
as he is' is to take us back to the olden days when Seetha was found missing and to remind us about 
his problems from then on. So the above verse is to be said like this: 'Rama who is so far accustomed 
to see only blood, wraiths, revenants, and souls is fed up and - such as he is, - he has seen a picturesque 
lake with a backdrop of pristine nature, and with the background music of trilling birds and rustling 
waters, then his innate need for visualising Seetha sprang up and he rushed towards lovely Lake of Pampa 
presuming her to be Lady Seetha...' but we usually take liberty to cut off other words and retain 'he' 
for pain of retyping.

Shlok 14: Rama spotted Pampa Lake from a distance which is plethoric with water, but entered into a lake called 
Matanga Lake on his way to Pampa... [3-75-14]

[Commentary] From here the real confusion about the arrangement of verses occurs, which is ascribed to the wrong 
copying of copyists. No two versions agree on the placement of verses and some from the next canto Kishkindha 
are also brought in here. With the result parsing of verses also goes wrong. Yet, this goes on.

Shlok 15: Though both Raghava-s came there composedly and dispassionately, but Rama, the son of Dasharatha, is 
ensorcelled by anguish on seeing a ladylike lake Pampa. [3-75-15]

Shlok 16: Rama entered the area of that beautiful lake which is beaming forth with lotuses hemming in from inside, 
and trees like Tilaka, Ashoka, Punnaga, Bakula, Uddala, are hemming it from outside. [3-75-16]

Shlok 17: That lake is huddled with delightful fringe lands and lotuses squeeze it from within, and its water 
is plethoric and crystalline, and its sand is softish all over. [3-75-17]

Shlok 18: That lake is beautified with packs of fishes and tortoises, and packs of trees on its banks, on which 
climber plants are wraparound like the ladyloves of those trees. [3-75-18]

Shlok 19: And that is adored by the beings like sylvan, reptilian, celestial, georgic, and elfish beings, and 
it is overcrowded with trees and tendrils, and it is a trove for fairish and clodish water. [3-75-19]

Shlok 20- 21: The lotuses of the lake are rich in their fragrance, and with the heaps of clusters of reddish, whitish, 
and blackish lotuses, and with such pinkish, whitish, and reddish lotuses the sheet of water is like 
a picturesquely painted canvas and it is surrounded by the orchards of flowered mango trees and sounded 
much by the screams of peacocks. [3-75-20, 21]

[Commentary] Two words used in the verses here udghaaTa a heap of things, which now became 'a public speech 
or lecture' and the other kuthaa detailed as above are said to be rare Sanskrit words in the 
book: 'Apart from kutha the verse quoted above contains one more word which unlike kutha 
is not noticed by Monier Williams in the sense in which it is used in Ramayana. This word is udghaaTa. 
It means a heap samuuha. This meaning of the word is very rare...' according to the book - 
Ramayana - A Linguistic Study, by Pt. Satya Vrata.

Shlok 22: Then Rama along with Lakshmana on seeing at that Pampa Lake, that self-refulgent son of Dasharatha whimpered 
over, owing to his passionate recollection of Seetha. [3-75-22]

Shlok 23- 24: That Pampa Lake is wraparound with the trees of Tilaka, Citron-fruits, Banyan, White-trees, likewise 
flowered are flowery trees like Red oleanders, Punnaaga, shrubs of Maalati and Kunda, likewise flowered 
are the trees of Madder, Nicula, Ashoka, and Seven-leaved banana plants, and plants of Mogra and climbers 
of Maadhavii Lata are also flowered, and with them she that Ladylike Pampa shone forth like a pulchritudinous 
lady. [3-75-23, 24]

[Commentary] From now until the end of first chapter of Kishkindha with a hundred couplets, we will be entering into 
the beauty of the nature. Poetics require romantic exaltation of nature, as usual,
varNana aatmakam kavitvam. Rama as Mr. Green extols it with his own tongue. 
The commentators are very much enthused by this verbal picturing of Valmiki and they have rendered more 
complex and beautiful compounds for the same verses. Why commentators, Mahaakavi Kaalidas is tempted 
to rewrite Ramayana, but he refrained to do so, because he cannot possibly tell Ramayana in such a simple 
language of Valmiki. Hence, Kalidas gave it up and embarked on to write another master piece
Raghu Vamsham, tradition says so. Let us touch Dharmaakuutam, which has 
many such complexly constructed compounds in Ch. 1 of Kishkindha, and one is brought here for this lady 
called Lake Pampa, for the reading pleasure our readers.

[Commentary] tadanataram ramaNiiyagandhaphalikaakalikaam nikaayanikaamaabhiraamam 
tribhuvanavijayodyata kusumasharaasanaTa~Nkaarasa~NkaavahamadakalakaNThanikvaaNam adabhramadhusambhramdbhramarajha~Nkaaraa 
la~NkR^itamanjulama~njariipunjapi~njaritadi~NmaNDalavikasitakusumasamudayavilaasahaasamanoharaabhir 
lalanaabhi iva lataabhiH

[Commentary] of which lalanaa iva 'a beautiful lady like...' is our concern.

Shlok 25b-26a: The aforesaid mountain renowned as Rishyamuka which is abounding with colourful ores and amazingly flowered 
trees is there on the bank of Pampa Lake. [3-75-25b, 26a]

Shlok 26b- 27b: A noble soul by his name Risharaja was there and that monkey's son is the highly valiant Sugreeva, thus 
he is renowned, and he presides over that mountain. [3-75-26b, 27b]

Shlok 27b- 28: That best one among men Rama, said this way, "oh, Lakshmana, you make a headway for that chief of monkeys, 
Sugreeva..." and further said this to Lakshmana whose valiance is truthfulness alone, "how can I possibly 
live without Seetha..." [3-75-27b, 28]

[Commentary] There is a filler foot in the above verses raajya bhraSTen diinena tasyaam aakskta cetasaa 
'lorn of my kingdom, lorn is my heart to her, and a lorn one I am... how can then I possibly live...' 
In view of mishmashed editing of verses even the critical edition has no perfect order of verses, leave 
alone ancient copies.

Shlok 29: Such as he is whose thinking is applying itself to Seetha alone, and who is vocalising his anguish for 
her, to whom aa stymie is laid by the Love-god just at the appearance that lake, that Rama on saying 
that sentence in that way to Lakshmana neared that superb and heart delighting lotus Lake Pampa. [3-75-29]

Shlok 30: On going step by step, and on going on seeing ardently and intently at that forest which has picturesque 
visuals of forestry, and which is with hurly-burly birds, not one, but numerous and divers are they, 
and then Rama along with Lakshmana on entering the area of that lake, has seen that Lake Pampa. [3-75-30]

